PAGE 1
 
Robot Path Planning by Traveling Salesman Problem with Circle Neighborhood: modeling, 
algorithm, and applications 
Arman Nedjatia, Béla Vizvárib 
aIndustrial Engineering Department, Quchan University of Technology, Quchan, Iran 
bIndustrial Engineering Department, Eastern Mediterranean University, Famagusta, Via Mersin10, North 
Cyprus 
Abstract 
The study investigates the problem of traveling salesman problem with circ ular neighborhood 
(TSPCN). Instead of cities there are circles and each point on circle  can be a potential visiting 
node. The problem is to find the minimum length Hamiltonian cycle connecting the circles. Among 
the various real life applications of the problem, this paper concentrates on robot path planning for 
the laser welding robot, and data collection in a wireless sensor network  by unmanned aerial 
vehicles (UAVs) . The TSPCN is formulated as a nonlinear model , the objective function is 
linearized, and as a solution procedure decomposed into a two-phase model. The Models are coded 
in Cplex and Knitro and solved for small and medium sized instances. 
Keywords: Traveling Salesman Problem; Laser Welding Robot; UAV; Wireless Sensor Network; 
Path Planning 
1. Introduction 
Traveling Salesman Problem (TSP) is a well-known problem in the field of optimization. Plenty 
of variants of TSP among with mathematical models and heuristic algorithms are  applied in real 
life situations [1–3]. TSP has many applications in  transportation, robotics, manufacturing, 
computer networks, etc. One of the important applications that has many generalizations  is path 
planning in robotics [4–8]. This study focuses on the problem of path planning for a mobile robot 
(i.e. unmanned aerial vehicle  (UAV) or a welding robot arm)  that has to traverse the minimum 
path to connect some predefined circles. 
A real life problem that was a motivation for this study is related to  Wireless Sensor Networks 
(WSN) that have been widely investigated and improved in last decade. The storage, 
communication, processing, and sensing capabilities of sensors are increased for agricultural, 
boarder monitoring, military uses, etc. When the sensors are distributed in a widespread area that 
is not possible to establish a communication network, a UAV could traverse to collect the data by 
passing through the spherical radio range around the sensors. However UAV path planning has 
many applications [9], WSN interested readers can refer to earlier studies [10–14].  

PAGE 2
Moreover another industrialized application of proposed problem is related to welding robot path 
planning. The spot welding robots are extensively used in processing industry, machinery , 
aerospace, and automotive ind ustries. These robots are effective when the number of welding 
points are increased. An optimal path for welding robot arm can effectively shorten the overall 
process time and consequently improves the productivity[15]. Both assembling and laser welding 
are typical examples. Industrial robots are still expensive equipment. A laser ray has high power, 
therefore the walls of the cell where the robot works must be strengthened by thick steel sheets to 
obtain a secure environment. It also increases the costs further. In this application a new 
optimization method is suggested for designing the route and to solve this problem. For another 
approach of designing the route of the laser robot arm see [1]. 
According to numerous real life applications of TSP, many variants [1,16] of this problem such as 
generalized TSP (GTSP) [17], TSP with clustering [18], hierarchical TSP [19], colored TSP [20], 
etc. have been investigated through  previous decades.  Moreover, there are many studies that 
focused on robotics applications of TSP.  [21] addresses the problem of mobile onsite power 
delivery for autonomous underwater vehicles  as a multiple GTSP to improve the range and 
duration of underwater operations. As a collaborative human-robot TSP [22] developed a model 
based on an initial remote sensing to optimize the selective TSP tour design and seeking the human 
assistance. Even forest management activities by robots are also investigated under the concept of 
TSP [23]. As a comprehensive survey [24] concentrated on a broad review of the classical studies 
and latest breakthroughs concerning the TSP and routing approaches  applied in robotic s. 
Furthermore a wide range of studies investigate on different types of TSP algorithms consists of 
approximation [25], heuristic [26], meta-heuristic [27], hybrid [28], and exact solution procedures 
[29].  
In this study we present a new industrialized variant of TSP which is TSP with Circle 
Neighborhood (TSPCN). TSPCN is a variant of Traveling Salesman Problem with Neighborhoods 
(TSPN). TSPN was first introduced by [30] and investigated in approximation algorithms [31]. In 
TSPN n number of connected neighborhoods or regions (as subsets) from an Euclidean plane, and 
a set of predefined coordinates are given, and the problem is to minimize the length of the tour that 
visits each neighborhood in one of the predefined coordinates [31]. Another relevant problem is 
GTSP where there are groups of coordinates within number of regions and the task is to find the 
minimum length Hamiltonian path that v isits any coordinate of each group exactly once.  In fact 
the TSPN is a generalization of GTSP . Therefore, s ince the TSPCN problem generalizes the 
Euclidean TSP when the circle radius is zero, it is considered as a NP-hard problem. As in TSPCN 
the regions are the points located on any coordinate of a circle and the tour can visit each region 
at any of its coordinate the problem is categorized as continuous  TSPN [31]. In TSPCN there are 
N number of cir cles (cities) that each must be visited once while visiting node can be any point 
inside or on the perimeter of the circles. Regarding the literature the TSPCN problem has not been 
studied before in this form. Fig 1 depicts a feasible solution of problem for a 10 circuit problem.  

PAGE 3
 
Figure 1.  A feasible solution of Ci-TSP 
The remainder of the article is structured as follows: The nonlinear mathematical formulations 
among with some linearization and a two phase approach  are presented in Section 2. Some small 
and medium scale instances are tested and solved by Baron, Couenne, and Knitro nonlinear solvers 
in Section 3. Discussion, conclusion and some suggestions for future studies are offered in section 
4. 
2. Mathematical Formulations 
2.1 Nonlinear mathematical model 
A horizontal plane contains 𝑁 points. Each point is an extreme point of a cone. The intersections 
of the cones with another horizontal plane above the first one, are the circles C1, C2, …, Cn. In the 
case of the laser welding robot, the surface of the product has a safety cover with the exception of 
the welding points. The cone of a point is the set of points of the space from where the laser ray 
can “see” the welding points. Similarly, the cone of a wireless sensor consists of the points of the 
space where the broadcast of the sensor can be detected.  There is no restriction on the radius or 
position of the circ les. The problem is to select one point from each cir cle and construct a tour 
along the selected points with a minimal total length. The selected points of different circ les may 
coincide. In the latter case the distances of the cities having the same selected point is zero. 
Let Ci={yi = (ui, vi)|(ui − ai)2 + (vi − bi)2 ≤ ri
2}, where (ai, bi) is the center of the circle and ri 
is the radius. 


PAGE 4
The well-known Miller, Tucker and Zemlin formulation of TSP [7] is applied in our model. The 
notations used in the model below are as follows: 
Sets: 
C :{1,2,…,N} the index set of circuits 
Parameters: 
𝑁 = the number of circles. 
(𝑎𝑖, 𝑏𝑖) = the center of circle𝑖. 
𝑅𝑖 = the radius of circle 𝑖. 
Variables: 
𝑠𝑒𝑞𝑖 : Sequence in which circle i (𝑖 ≠ 1) is visited. 
(𝑢𝑖, 𝑣𝑖) : The selected point of circle 𝑖 
𝑑𝑖𝑠𝑖𝑗 : The distance of the selected points of circles 𝑖 and 𝑗  
𝑝𝑖𝑗 : Binary variable; equals to one if circle j is visited immediately after circ le i, otherwise it is 
zero. 
 
The objective function is to minimize the total distance. 
Model 𝑇0: 
 𝑀𝑖𝑛 ∑ ∑ 𝑝𝑖𝑗𝑑𝑖𝑠𝑖𝑗
𝑗∈𝐶𝑖∈𝐶
 (1) 
 
St; 
 ∑ 𝑝𝑖𝑗
𝑗∈𝐶
= 1         ∀𝑖 ∈ 𝐶|𝑖 ≠ 𝑗 (2) 
 
 ∑ 𝑝𝑗𝑖
𝑗∈𝐶
= 1         ∀𝑖 ∈ 𝐶|𝑖 ≠ 𝑗 (3) 
 
Constraints (2) and (3) ensures that each node must be visited exactly once.   
 
 𝑠𝑒𝑞𝑖 − 𝑠𝑒𝑞𝑗 + 𝑁𝑝𝑖𝑗 ≤ 𝑁 − 1        ∀𝑖 ≠ 𝑗 ∈ 𝐶|𝑖, 𝑗 ≠ 1 (4) 
 
Constraint (4) is subtour elimination constraint adopted from [32]. 
 
𝑅𝑖
2 − (𝑢𝑖 − 𝑎𝑖)2 − (𝑣𝑖 − 𝑏𝑖)2 ≥ 0       ∀𝑖 ∈ 𝐶 (5) 
Constraint (5) guarantees that the selected nodes must be in the circuit.  
 

PAGE 5
 𝑑𝑖𝑠𝑖𝑗
2 ≥ (𝑢𝑖 − 𝑢𝑗)
2
+  (𝑣𝑖 − 𝑣𝑗)
2
      ∀𝑖 ≠ 𝑗 ∈ 𝐶 (6) 
 𝑝𝑖𝑗 ∈ {0,1}        ∀𝑖, 𝑗 ∈ 𝐶 (7) 
Constraint (6) assures that the value of variable 𝑑𝑖𝑠𝑖𝑗 cannot be less than the distance of the two 
selected points, and constraint (7) represents the integrality constraint. The optimality will ensure 
strict equation if it is necessary. 
As the objective function is non-linear in its original form (1),  it is possible to linearize it. It is 
necessary to rewrite the objective function and constraint (6) as follows: 
 
 𝑀𝑖𝑛 ∑ ∑ 𝑑𝑖𝑠𝑖𝑗
𝑗∈𝐶𝑖∈𝐶
 (8) 
 
 𝑑𝑖𝑠𝑖𝑗
2 + 𝑀(1 − 𝑝𝑖𝑗) ≥ (𝑢𝑖 − 𝑢𝑗)
2
+ (𝑣𝑖 − 𝑣𝑗)
2
        ∀𝑖 ≠ 𝑗 ∈ 𝐶 (6-a) 
 𝑑𝑖𝑠𝑖𝑗 ≥ 0  (6-b) 
Where M is a very big number. 
2.2 Two phase mathematical formulations 
It is important to emphasize in connection to the numerical solution that it is an industrial design 
problem as the route of the robot arm is optimized only once but the same solution is applied many 
times. The number of applications is at least the number of cars produced from the car model. 
Thus, it is worth to invest a longer CPU time into the solution of the mathematical model to obtain 
a good feasible solution for the industrial case.  However, in case of data collection application 
(WSN and UAVs), CPU time is important. Thus, in order to fasten the solution procedure a two-
phase model is presented in the following. In the first phase, the circles are divided into four equal 
quarters. Each quarter is substituted by the middle point of its arc. Only one out of these four points 
needs to be visited. The optimal solution from the first phase determines a sector for each cir cle 
and any of the points of this sector can be selected in the second phase. 
Sets: 
L :{1,2,3,4} Set of nodes on circuits 
Parameters: 
𝐻𝑖𝑗
𝑘𝑙 = Distance between node 𝑘 located on circuit 𝑖 and node 𝑙 located on circuit 𝑗. 
𝐺𝑙 = The angle formed by the radius, with respect to the positive X-axis (degrees). 
Variables: 

PAGE 6
𝑥𝑖𝑗
𝑘𝑙 : Binary variable equals to 1 if there is an arc from node k of circuit i to node l of circuit j, otherwise it 
is 0. 
𝐻𝑖𝑗
𝑘𝑙 = √((𝑅𝑖𝐶𝑜𝑠(𝐺𝑙) + 𝑎𝑖) − (𝑅𝑗𝐶𝑜𝑠(𝐺𝑘) + 𝑎𝑗))2 + ((𝑅𝑖𝑆𝑖𝑛(𝐺𝑙) + 𝑏𝑖) − (𝑅𝑗𝑆𝑖𝑛(𝐺𝑘) + 𝑏𝑗))2 
 
(11) 
Equation (11) which is depicted in Fig 2  calculates the distance between node l of circuit i and node k of 
circuit j. 
 
Figure 2. The explanation of Formula (11) 
Model T1 is the first phase that finds the optimal tour while each circuit’s perimeter is divided into quarters 
and the center of each quarter is a potential node. Thus model T1 finds the optimal sequence of visiting the 
circuits based on the center point of each quarter’s perimeter. Then Model T2 uses the optimal visiting 
sequence as a parameter to find the optimal coordinates. 
Model T1: 
 𝑀𝑖𝑛 ∑ ∑ ∑ ∑ 𝐻𝑖𝑗
𝑘𝑙𝑥𝑖𝑗
𝑘𝑙
𝑘∈𝐿𝑙∋𝐿𝑗≠𝑖∈𝐶𝑖∈𝐶
 
St: 
(12) 
 ∑ ∑ ∑ 𝑥𝑖𝑗
𝑘𝑙
𝑘∈𝐿
= 1           ∀𝑖 ∈ 𝐶
𝑙∈𝐿𝑗∈𝐶
 (13) 
 ∑ ∑ ∑ 𝑥𝑗𝑖
𝑘𝑙
𝑘∈𝐿
= 1           ∀𝑖 ∈ 𝐶
𝑙∈𝐿𝑗∈𝐶
 (14) 
 ∑ ∑ 𝑥𝑖𝑗
𝑘𝑙
𝑘∈𝐾𝑙∈𝐿
+  ∑ ∑ 𝑥𝑗𝑖
𝑙𝑘
𝑘∈𝐾
 
𝑙∈𝐿
≤ 1           ∀𝑖 ≠ 𝑗 ∈ 𝐶 (15) 
 𝑠𝑒𝑞𝑖 − 𝑠𝑒𝑞𝑗 + 𝑁 ∑ ∑ 𝑥𝑖𝑗
𝑘𝑙
𝑘∈𝐿
≤ 𝑁 − 1
𝑙∈𝐿
        ∀𝑖 ≠ 𝑗 ∈ 𝐶 | 𝑖, 𝑗 ≠ 1 (16) 


PAGE 7
 ∑ ∑ 𝑥𝑖𝑗
𝑙𝑘
𝑘∈𝐿𝑗∈𝐶
− ∑ ∑ 𝑥𝑗𝑖
𝑘𝑙
𝑘∈𝐿𝑗∈𝐶
= 0         ∀𝑖 ∈ 𝐶, 𝑙 ∈ 𝐿 (17) 
 
 𝑥𝑖𝑗
𝑘𝑙 ∈ {0,1}        ∀𝑖, 𝑗 ∈ 𝐶, ∀𝑙, 𝑘 ∈ 𝐿 (18) 
 𝑠𝑒𝑞𝑖 ∈ 𝑖𝑛𝑡𝑒𝑔𝑒𝑟 𝑎𝑛𝑑 ≥ 1         ∀𝑖 ∈ 𝐶 (19) 
 
Objective function (12) minimizes the total distance of the tour and the constraint are well known TSP 
problem equations. However constraint (15) is a valid inequality and helps to remove undesirable fractional 
solutions and tighten the relaxation of the model.  
Let’s define additional sets of parameters for model T2 as follows; 
𝑂𝑖𝑙: Equals to one if node i of circuit l is visited, and zero otherwise.  
𝑞𝑖𝑗: Equals to one if we move to circuit j right after circuit i. 
𝑈𝑚𝑎𝑥𝑖: Maximum amount on X-axis that the optimal point can take on circuit i. 
𝑈𝑚𝑖𝑛𝑖: Minimum amount on X-axis that the optimal point can take on circuit i. 
𝑉𝑚𝑎𝑥𝑖: Maximum amount on Y-axis that the optimal point can take on circuit i. 
𝑉𝑚𝑎𝑥𝑖: Minimum amount on X-axis that the optimal point can take on circuit i. 
 𝑞𝑖𝑗 = ∑ ∑ 𝑥𝑖𝑗
𝑘𝑙
𝑘∈𝐿𝑙∈𝐿
        ∀𝑖, 𝑗 ∈ 𝐶 (20) 
Equations (20) and (21) assigns the results of model T1 to the parameters that will use in model T2. 
Model T2: 
 𝑀𝑖𝑛 ∑ ∑ 𝑞𝑖𝑗𝑑𝑖𝑠𝑖𝑗
𝑗∈𝐶𝑖∈𝐶
 
St:  
𝑒𝑞 (5), (6) 
(21) 
 𝑈𝑚𝑖𝑛𝑖 ≤ 𝑢𝑖 ≤ 𝑈𝑚𝑎𝑥𝑖         ∀𝑖 ∈ 𝐶 (22) 
 𝑉𝑚𝑖𝑛𝑖 ≤ 𝑣𝑖 ≤ 𝑉𝑚𝑎𝑥𝑖         ∀𝑖 ∈ 𝐶 
 
(23) 
Objective function (21) minimizes the total distance while constraints (22) and (23) assigns the lower bound 
and upper bound to coordinate variables based on the results of model T1. 

PAGE 8
 
3. Results 
Two examples for problems with 12 and 20 circles can be seen in Figure 3 and Figure 4. The optimal 
solution was obtained by the two phase method described in section 2.2. The main nonlinear model was 
coded in GAMS and solved by different nonlinear solvers (Couenne, Antigone, Baron, Knitro), however 
no integer solution was obtained. The two -phase method solved the 12 -circle’s problem optimally in 500 
seconds and for 20-circle problem in 2400 seconds. The optimal solution is shown in Figure 3. 
 
Figure 3 Optimal solution of 12 circuits (Two-phase method) 


PAGE 9
 
Figure 4. Optimal solution of a 20-circle problem (Two-phase method) 
Also a 40 circuit problem is solved by the two phase method with the execution time of 6700 seconds. 
Figure 4 depicts the optimal solution of the problem. 


PAGE 10
 
Figure 5 The optimal solution of a 40 circuit problem (Two-phase method) 
Another problem is solved. This time it has a real industrial size of 75 welding points. The problem 
and its optimal solution can be found on Figure 5. The original mathematical model was too 
difficult in this case. Therefore the problem was solved in two steps. In the first step a traditional 
TSP was solved. The positions of the cities were the center points of the regions. The selected 
points (ui, vi) were also included in the problem for some technical reasons although they did not 
affect the optimality in any sense. In the second main step those subtour elimination constraints 
were used which were generated in the first main step.  


PAGE 11
 
Figure 6 Industrialized size problem of 75 circuits 
The method mentioned above is a so -called cutting plane method. As the problem is too large to 
solve, instead of the original problem a relaxation is solved. In many cases, relaxation means that 
some constraints are deleted. It means that not all subtour elimination constraints are added to the 
problem. If the optimal solution of the relaxed problem does not satisfy all the constraint s then a 
violated subtour elimination constraint is added to the problem. The name “cutting plane method” 
reflects the fact that the subtour elimination constraint is a linear inequality which cuts the previous 
optimal solution.  
4. Discussion and conclusion 
This short discussion paper investigates a new problem of robotic path planning . The study 
concentrates on UAVs path that collect data from distributed wireless sensors, and welding robot 
path in automobile industry. The problem is a generalization of traveling salesman problem with 
neighborhood when the  neighborhood shapes are circles with different radiuses. It is enough to 
visit just one point of the circle while the minimum length Hamiltonian cycle. This problem could 
also have applications in telecommunication systems. The exact nonlinear mathematical model of 
the problem was developed and a two phase method along with a lineari zation are presented to 
shorten the execution time. The models are validated with some numerical examples and the results 
shows the efficiency of the two-phase method. 
 


PAGE 12
Direction for future studies can be categorized in the subsequent three fields: Heuristic and Meta -
heuristics development, problem and modeling extension, and exact solution procedures. Multi-robot 
system or visiting time window for sensors could be some examples of problem extension. Moreover, 
instead of a circle, one can consider the neigh bors as a cut of the hemisphere, while the complexity of 
problem is arisen, the accuracy is increased.  
 
References 
1. Ilavarasi, K.; Joseph, K. S. Variants of travelling salesman problem: A survey. In 
International Conference on Information Communication and Embedded Systems (ICICES2014); 
IEEE, 2014; pp. 1–7. 
2. Osaba, E.; Yang, X.-S.; Diaz, F.; Lopez-Garcia, P.; Carballedo, R. An improved discrete bat 
algorithm for symmetric and asymmetric Traveling Salesman Problems. Eng. Appl. Artif. Intell. 
2016, 48, 59–71. 
3. Letchford, A. N.; Lodi, A. The traveling salesman problem: a book review. 4OR 2007, 5, 315–
317. 
4. Manyam, S. G.; Rathinam, S.; Darbha, S.; Obermeyer, K. J. LOWER BOUNDS FOR A 
VEHICLE ROUTING PROBLEM WITH MOTION CONSTRAINTS. Int. J. Robot. Autom. 
2015, 30. 
5. Li, L.; Wang, X.; Xu, D.; Tan, M. AN ACCURATE PATH PLANNING ALGORITHM 
BASED ON TRIANGULAR MESHES IN ROBOTIC FIBRE PLACEMENT. Int. J. Robot. 
Autom. 2017, 32. 
6. Wang, L.; Luo, C. A HYBRID GENETIC TABU SEARCH ALGORITHM FOR MOBILE 
ROBOT TO SOLVE AS/RS PATH PLANNING. Int. J. Robot. Autom. 2018, 33. 
7. Na, G.; Xiaoyan, S.; Dunwei, G.; Yong, Z. SOLVING ROBOT PATH PLANNING IN AN 
ENVIRONMENT WITH TERRAINS BASED ON INTERVAL MULTI-OBJECTIVE PSO. Int. 
J. Robot. Autom. 2016, 31. 
8. Wang, Y.; Wang, S.; Tan, M.; Yu, J. SIMULTANEOUS ARRIVAL PLANNING FOR 
MULTIPLE UNMANNED VEHICLES FORMATION RECONFIGURATION. Int. J. Robot. 
Autom. 2017, 32. 
9. Nedjati, A.; Izbirak, G.; Vizvari, B.; Arkat, J. Complete Coverage Path Planning for a Multi-
UAV Response System in Post-Earthquake Assessment. Robotics. 
10. Jawhar, I.; Mohamed, N.; Al-Jaroodi, J.; Zhang, S. A Framework for Using Unmanned 
Aerial Vehicles for Data Collection in Linear Wireless Sensor Networks. J. Intell. Robot. Syst. 
2014, 74, 437–453. 
11. Tazibt, C. Y.; Bekhti, M.; Djamah, T.; Achir, N.; Boussetta, K. Wireless sensor network 
clustering for UAV-based data gathering. In 2017 Wireless Days; IEEE, 2017; pp. 245–247. 

PAGE 13
12. Wang, C.; Ma, F.; Yan, J.; De, D.; Das, S. K. Efficient Aerial Data Collection with UAV in 
Large-Scale Wireless Sensor Networks. Int. J. Distrib. Sens. Networks 2015, 11, 286080. 
13. Zhan, C.; Zeng, Y.; Zhang, R. Energy-Efficient Data Collection in UAV Enabled Wireless 
Sensor Network. IEEE Wirel. Commun. Lett. 2017, 1–1. 
14. He, P.; Dai, S. REAL-TIME STEALTH CORRIDOR PATH PLANNING FOR FLEETS OF 
UNMANNED AERIAL VEHICLES IN LOW-ALTITUDE PENETRATION. Int. J. Robot. 
Autom. 2015, 30. 
15. Wang, X. W.; Shi, Y. P.; Yu, R.; Gu, X. S. Intelligent Welding Robot Path Planning. In; 
Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2015; pp. 25–32. 
16. Gutin, G.; Punnen, A. P. The traveling salesman problem and its variations; Kluwer 
Academic Publishers, 2002. 
17. Pintea, C.-M.; Pop, P. C.; Chira, C. The generalized traveling salesman problem solved with 
ant algorithms. Complex Adapt. Syst. Model. 2017, 5, 8. 
18. Schneider, J. J.; Bukur, T.; Krause, A. Traveling Salesman Problem with Clustering. J. Stat. 
Phys. 2010, 141, 767–784. 
19. Panchamgam, K.; Xiong, Y.; Golden, B.; Dussault, B.; Wasil, E. The hierarchical traveling 
salesman problem. Optim. Lett. 2013, 7, 1517–1524. 
20. Li, J.; Zhou, M.; Sun, Q.; Dai, X.; Yu, X. Colored Traveling Salesman Problem. IEEE Trans. 
Cybern. 2015, 45, 2390–2401. 
21. Li, B.; Page, B. R.; Hoffman, J.; Moridian, B.; Mahmoudian, N. Rendezvous Planning for 
Multiple AUVs With Mobile Charging Stations in Dynamic Currents. IEEE Robot. Autom. Lett. 
2019, 4, 1653–1660. 
22. Cai, H.; Mostofi, Y. A Human-Robot Collaborative Traveling Salesman Problem: Robotic 
Site Inspection with Human Assistance. In 2016 AMERICAN CONTROL CONFERENCE 
(ACC); IEEE: Boston, 2016; Vol. 06, pp. 6170–6176. 
23. Mowshowitz, A.; Tominaga, A.; Hayashi, E. Robot Navigation in Forest Management. J. 
Robot. MECHATRONICS 2018, 30, 223–230. 
24. Macharet, D. G.; Campos, M. F. M. A survey on routing problems and robotic systems. 
Robotica 2018, 36, 1781–1803. 
25. Bao, X.; Liu, Z.; Yu, W.; Li, G. A note on approximation algorithms of the clustered 
traveling salesman problem. Inf. Process. Lett. 2017, 127, 54–57. 
26. Mbiadou Saleu, R. G.; Deroussi, L.; Feillet, D.; Grangeon, N.; Quilliot, A. An iterative two-
step heuristic for the parallel drone scheduling traveling salesman problem. Networks 2018, 72, 
459–474. 
27. Kanda, J.; Carvalho, A. de; Hruschka, E.; Soares, C.; Brazdil, P. Meta-learning to select the 
best meta-heuristic for the Traveling Salesman Problem: A comparison of meta-features. 

PAGE 14
Neurocomputing 2016, 205, 393–406. 
28. Şahin, Y.; Karagül, K. Solving Travelling Salesman Problem Using Hybrid Fluid Genetic 
Algorithm (HFGA). Pamukkale Univ. J. Eng. Sci. 2019, 25, 106–114. 
29. Burkhovetskiy, V. V.; Steinberg, B. Y. Parallelizing an exact algorithm for the traveling 
salesman problem. Procedia Comput. Sci. 2017, 119, 97–102. 
30. Arkin, E. M.; Hassin, R. Approximation algorithms for the geometric covering salesman 
problem. Discret. Appl. Math. 1994, 55, 197–218. 
31. ELBASSIONI, K.; FISHKIN, A. V.; SITTERS, R. APPROXIMATION ALGORITHMS 
FOR THE EUCLIDEAN TRAVELING SALESMAN PROBLEM WITH DISCRETE AND 
CONTINUOUS NEIGHBORHOODS. Int. J. Comput. Geom. Appl. 2009, 19, 173–193. 
32. Miller, C. E.; Tucker, A. W.; Zemlin, R. A. Integer Programming Formulation of Traveling 
Salesman Problems. J. ACM 1960, 7, 326–329. 
 
 
 
  