=== PDF PAGE 1 ===
     627
A Reduction of Imitation Learning and Structured Prediction
to No-Regret Online Learning
Stéphane Ross Geoffrey J. Gordon J. Andrew Bagnell
Robotics Institute
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA 15213, USA
stephaneross@cmu.edu
Machine Learning Department
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA 15213, USA
ggordon@cs.cmu.edu
Robotics Institute
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA 15213, USA
dbagnell@ri.cmu.edu
Abstract
Sequential prediction problems such as imitation
learning, where future observations depend on
previous predictions (actions), violate the com-
mon i.i.d. assumptions made in statistical learn-
ing. This leads to poor performance in theory
and often in practice. Some recent approaches
(Daumé III et al., 2009; Ross and Bagnell, 2010)
provide stronger guarantees in this setting, but re-
main somewhat unsatisfactory as they train either
non-stationary or stochastic policies and require
a large number of iterations. In this paper, we
propose a new iterative algorithm, which trains a
stationary deterministic policy, that can be seen
as a no regret algorithm in an online learning set-
ting. We show that any such no regret algorithm,
combined with additional reduction assumptions,
must ﬁnd a policy with good performance under
the distribution of observations it induces in such
sequential settings. We demonstrate that this
new approach outperforms previous approaches
on two challenging imitation learning problems
and a benchmark sequence labeling problem.
1 INTRODUCTION
Sequence Prediction problems arise commonly in practice.
For instance, most robotic systems must be able to pre-
dict/make a sequence of actions given a sequence of obser-
vations revealed to them over time. In complex robotic sys-
tems where standard control methods fail, we must often
resort to learning a controller that can make such predic-
tions. Imitation learning techniques, where expert demon-
Appearing in Proceedings of the14th International Conference on
Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Statistics (AISTATS) 2011, Fort Laud-
erdale, FL, USA. V olume 15 of JMLR: W&CP 15. Copyright
2011 by the authors.
strations of good behavior are used to learn a controller,
have proven very useful in practice and have led to state-
of-the art performance in a variety of applications (Schaal,
1999; Abbeel and Ng, 2004; Ratliff et al., 2006; Silver
et al., 2008; Argall et al., 2009; Chernova and Veloso, 2009;
Ross and Bagnell, 2010). A typical approach to imitation
learning is to train a classiﬁer or regressor to predict an ex-
pert’s behavior given training data of the encountered ob-
servations (input) and actions (output) performed by the ex-
pert. However since the learner’s prediction affects future
input observations/states during execution of the learned
policy, this violate the crucial i.i.d. assumption made by
most statistical learning approaches.
Ignoring this issue leads to poor performance both in the-
ory and practice (Ross and Bagnell, 2010). In particular,
a classiﬁer that makes a mistake with probability ϵ under
the distribution of states/observations encountered by the
expert can make as many as T 2ϵ mistakes in expectation
overT -steps under the distribution of states the classiﬁer
itself induces (Ross and Bagnell, 2010). Intuitively this is
because as soon as the learner makes a mistake, it may en-
counter completely different observations than those under
expert demonstration, leading to a compounding of errors.
Recent approaches (Ross and Bagnell, 2010) can guarantee
an expected number of mistakes linear (or nearly so) in the
task horizon T and error ϵ by training over several itera-
tions and allowing the learner to inﬂuence the input states
where expert demonstration is provided (through execution
of its own controls in the system). One approach (Ross and
Bagnell, 2010) learns a non-stationary policy by training
a different policy for each time step in sequence, starting
from the ﬁrst step. Unfortunately this is impractical when
T is large or ill-deﬁned. Another approach called SMILe
(Ross and Bagnell, 2010), similar to SEARN (Daumé III
et al., 2009) and CPI (Kakade and Langford, 2002), trains
a stationary stochastic policy (a ﬁnite mixture of policies)
by adding a new policy to the mixture at each iteration of
training. However this may be unsatisfactory for practical
applications as some policies in the mixture are worse than

=== PDF PAGE 2 ===
     628
A Reduction of Imitation Learning and Structured Prediction to No-Regret Online Learning
others and the learned controller may be unstable.
We propose a new meta-algorithm for imitation learning
which learns a stationary deterministic policy guaranteed
to perform well under its induced distribution of states
(number of mistakes/costs that grows linearly in T and
classiﬁcation cost ϵ). We take a reduction-based approach
(Beygelzimer et al., 2005) that enables reusing existing su-
pervised learning algorithms. Our approach is simple to
implement, has no free parameters except the supervised
learning algorithm sub-routine, and requires a number of
iterations that scales nearly linearly with the effective hori-
zon of the problem. It naturally handles continuous as well
as discrete predictions. Our approach is closely related to
no regret online learning algorithms (Cesa-Bianchi et al.,
2004; Hazan et al., 2006; Kakade and Shalev-Shwartz,
2008) (in particular Follow-The-Leader) but better lever-
ages the expert in our setting. Additionally, we show that
any no-regret learner can be used in a particular fashion to
learn a policy that achieves similar guarantees.
We begin by establishing our notation and setting, discuss
related work, and then present the DA GGER (Dataset Ag-
gregation) method. We analyze this approach using a no-
regret and a reduction approach (Beygelzimer et al., 2005).
Beyond the reduction analysis, we consider the sample
complexity of our approach using online-to-batch (Cesa-
Bianchi et al., 2004) techniques. We demonstrate DAGGER
is scalable and outperforms previous approaches in practice
on two challenging imitation learning problems: 1) learn-
ing to steer a car in a 3D racing game (Super Tux Kart) and
2) and learning to play Super Mario Bros., given input im-
age features and corresponding actions by a human expert
and near-optimal planner respectively. Following Daumé
III et al. (2009) in treating structured prediction as a de-
generate imitation learning problem, we apply DAGGER to
the OCR (Taskar et al., 2003) benchmark prediction prob-
lem achieving results competitive with the state-of-the-art
(Taskar et al., 2003; Ratliff et al., 2007; Daumé III et al.,
2009) using only single-pass, greedy prediction.
2 PRELIMINARIES
We begin by introducing notation relevant to our setting.
We denote by Π the class of policies the learner is consid-
ering and T the task horizon. For any policy π, we let dt
π
denote the distribution of states at timet if the learner exe-
cuted policyπ from time step 1 tot− 1. Furthermore, we
denotedπ = 1
T
∑T
t=1dt
π the average distribution of states
if we follow policy π forT steps. Given a state s, we de-
noteC(s,a ) the expected immediate cost of performing ac-
tiona in states for the task we are considering and denote
Cπ(s) = Ea∼π(s)[C(s,a )] the expected immediate cost of
π ins. We assume C is bounded in [0, 1]. The total cost
of executing policy π for T -steps ( i.e., the cost-to-go) is
denotedJ(π) = ∑T
t=1 Es∼dtπ[Cπ(s)] =T Es∼dπ[Cπ(s)].
In imitation learning, we may not necessarily know or ob-
serve true costs C(s,a ) for the particular task. Instead,
we observe expert demonstrations and seek to boundJ(π)
for any cost function C based on how well π mimics the
expert’s policyπ∗. Denote 𝓁 the observed surrogate loss
function we minimize instead of C. For instance 𝓁(s,π )
may be the expected 0-1 loss of π with respect to π∗ in
states, or a squared/hinge loss ofπ with respect toπ∗ ins.
Importantly, in many instances, C and𝓁 may be the same
function– for instance, if we are interested in optimizing the
learner’s ability to predict the actions chosen by an expert.
Our goal is to ﬁnd a policyˆπ which minimizes the observed
surrogate loss under its induced distribution of states, i.e.:
ˆπ = arg min
π∈Π
Es∼dπ[𝓁(s,π )] (1)
As system dynamics are assumed both unknown and com-
plex, we cannot computedπ and can only sample it by exe-
cutingπ in the system. Hence this is a non-i.i.d. supervised
learning problem due to the dependence of the input distri-
bution on the policy π itself. The interaction between pol-
icy and the resulting distribution makes optimization difﬁ-
cult as it results in a non-convex objective even if the loss
𝓁(s,·) is convex inπ for all statess. We now brieﬂy review
previous approaches and their guarantees.
2.1 Supervised Approach to Imitation
The traditional approach to imitation learning ignores the
change in distribution and simply trains a policyπ that per-
forms well under the distribution of states encountered by
the expert dπ∗. This can be achieved using any standard
supervised learning algorithm. It ﬁnds the policy ˆπsup:
ˆπsup = arg min
π∈Π
Es∼dπ∗ [𝓁(s,π )] (2)
Assuming𝓁(s,π ) is the 0-1 loss (or upper bound on the 0-
1 loss) implies the following performance guarantee with
respect to any task cost functionC bounded in [0, 1]:
Theorem 2.1. (Ross and Bagnell, 2010) Let
Es∼dπ∗ [𝓁(s,π )] =ϵ, thenJ(π)≤J(π∗) +T 2ϵ.
Proof. Follows from result in Ross and Bagnell (2010)
sinceϵ is an upper bound on the 0-1 loss ofπ indπ∗.
Note that this bound is tight, i.e. there exist problems
such that a policy π with ϵ 0-1 loss on dπ∗ can incur ex-
tra cost that grows quadratically in T . Kääriäinen (2006)
demonstrated this in a sequence prediction setting 1 and
1In their example, an error rate of ϵ > 0 when trained to
predict the next output in sequence with the previous correct
output as input can lead to an expected number of mistakes of
T
2 − 1−(1−2ϵ)T +1
4ϵ + 1
2 over sequences of length T at test time.
This is bounded byT 2ϵ and behaves as Θ(T 2ϵ) for smallϵ.

=== PDF PAGE 3 ===
     629
Stéphane Ross, Geoffrey J. Gordon, J. Andrew Bagnell
Ross and Bagnell (2010) provided an imitation learning ex-
ample whereJ(ˆπsup) = (1−ϵT )J(π∗) +T 2ϵ. Hence the
traditional supervised learning approach has poor perfor-
mance guarantees due to the quadratic growth inT . Instead
we would prefer approaches that can guarantee growth lin-
ear or near-linear inT andϵ. The following two approaches
from Ross and Bagnell (2010) achieve this on some classes
of imitation learning problems, including all those where
surrogate loss𝓁 upper boundsC.
2.2 Forward Training
The forward training algorithm introduced by Ross and
Bagnell (2010) trains a non-stationary policy (one policy
πt for each time stept) iteratively overT iterations, where
at iteration t,πt is trained to mimic π∗ on the distribution
of states at time t induced by the previously trained poli-
cies π1,π 2,...,π t−1. By doing so, πt is trained on the
actual distribution of states it will encounter during exe-
cution of the learned policy. Hence the forward algorithm
guarantees that the expected loss under the distribution of
states induced by the learned policy matches the average
loss during training, and hence improves performance.
We here provide a theorem slightly more general than the
one provided by Ross and Bagnell (2010) that applies to
any policy π that can guarantee ϵ surrogate loss under its
own distribution of states. This will be useful to bound the
performance of our new approach presented in Section 3.
LetQπ′
t (s,π ) denote thet-step cost of executingπ in initial
states and then following policy π′ and assume 𝓁(s,π ) is
the 0-1 loss (or an upper bound on the 0-1 loss), then we
have the following performance guarantee with respect to
any task cost functionC bounded in [0, 1]:
Theorem 2.2. Letπ be such that Es∼dπ[𝓁(s,π )] = ϵ, and
Qπ∗
T−t+1(s,a )−Qπ∗
T−t+1(s,π∗)≤ u for all action a,t∈
{1, 2,...,T },dt
π(s)> 0, thenJ(π)≤J(π∗) +uTϵ .
Proof. We here follow a similar proof to Ross and Bagnell
(2010). Given our policyπ, consider the policyπ1:t, which
executesπ in the ﬁrst t-steps and then execute the expert
π∗. Then
J(π)
=J(π∗) + ∑T−1
t=0 [J(π1:T−t)−J(π1:T−t−1)]
=J(π∗) + ∑T
t=1 Es∼dtπ[Qπ∗
T−t+1(s,π )−Qπ∗
T−t+1(s,π∗)]
≤J(π∗) +u ∑T
t=1 Es∼dtπ[𝓁(s,π )]
=J(π∗) +uTϵ
The inequality follows from the fact that 𝓁(s,π ) upper
bounds the 0-1 loss, and hence the probability π and π∗
pick different actions ins; when they pick different actions,
the increase in cost-to-go≤u.
In the worst case, u could be O(T ) and the forward al-
gorithm wouldn’t provide any improvement over the tra-
ditional supervised learning approach. However, in many
cases u is O(1) or sub-linear in T and the forward algo-
rithm leads to improved performance. For instance if C is
the 0-1 loss with respect to the expert, then u≤ 1. Addi-
tionally ifπ∗ is able to recover from mistakes made byπ, in
the sense that within a few steps,π∗ is back in a distribution
of states that is close to whatπ∗ would be in ifπ∗ had been
executed initially instead of π, then u will be O(1). 2 A
drawback of the forward algorithm is that it is impractical
whenT is large (or undeﬁned) as we must trainT different
policies sequentially and cannot stop the algorithm before
we complete all T iterations. Hence it can not be applied
to most real-world applications.
2.3 Stochastic Mixing Iterative Learning
SMILe, proposed by Ross and Bagnell (2010), alleviates
this problem and can be applied in practice when T is
large or undeﬁned by adopting an approach similar to
SEARN (Daumé III et al., 2009) where a stochastic sta-
tionary policy is trained over several iterations. Initially
SMILe starts with a policy π0 which always queries and
executes the expert’s action choice. At iteration n, a pol-
icy ˆπn is trained to mimic the expert under the distribu-
tion of trajectories πn−1 induces and then updates πn =
πn−1 +α(1−α)n−1(ˆπn−π0). This update is interpreted
as adding probabilityα(1−α)n−1 to executing policy ˆπn
at any step and removing probability α(1−α)n−1 of ex-
ecuting the queried expert’s action. At iteration n, πn is
a mixture of n policies and the probability of using the
queried expert’s action is (1−α)n. We can stop the al-
gorithm at any iteration N by returning the re-normalized
policy ˜πN = πN−(1−α)Nπ0
1−(1−α)N which doesn’t query the expert
anymore. Ross and Bagnell (2010) showed that choosing
α inO( 1
T 2 ) andN inO(T 2 logT ) guarantees near-linear
regret inT andϵ for some class of problems.
3 DA TASET AGGREGA TION
We now present DA GGER (Dataset Aggregation), an it-
erative algorithm that trains a deterministic policy that
achieves good performance guarantees under its induced
distribution of states.
In its simplest form, the algorithm proceeds as follows.
At the ﬁrst iteration, it uses the expert’s policy to gather
a dataset of trajectories D and train a policy ˆπ2 that best
mimics the expert on those trajectories. Then at iteration
n, it uses ˆπn to collect more trajectories and adds those
trajectories to the dataset D. The next policy ˆπn+1 is the
policy that best mimics the expert on the whole datasetD.
2This is the case for instance in Markov Desision Processes
(MDPs) when the Markov Chain deﬁned by the system dynamics
and policy π∗ is rapidly mixing. In particular, if it is α-mixing
with exponential decay rateδ thenu isO( 1
1−exp(−δ)).

=== PDF PAGE 4 ===
     630
A Reduction of Imitation Learning and Structured Prediction to No-Regret Online Learning
InitializeD←∅ .
Initialize ˆπ1 to any policy in Π.
fori = 1 toN do
Letπi =βiπ∗ + (1−βi)ˆπi.
SampleT -step trajectories usingπi.
Get datasetDi ={(s,π∗(s))} of visited states by πi
and actions given by expert.
Aggregate datasets:D←D ⋃Di.
Train classiﬁer ˆπi+1 onD.
end for
Return best ˆπi on validation.
Algorithm 3.1: DAGGER Algorithm.
In other words, DA GGER proceeds by collecting a dataset
at each iteration under the current policy and trains the next
policy under the aggregate of all collected datasets. The in-
tuition behind this algorithm is that over the iterations, we
are building up the set of inputs that the learned policy is
likely to encounter during its execution based on previous
experience (training iterations). This algorithm can be in-
terpreted as a Follow-The-Leader algorithm in that at itera-
tionn we pick the best policy ˆπn+1 in hindsight, i.e. under
all trajectories seen so far over the iterations.
To better leverage the presence of the expert in our imita-
tion learning setting, we optionally allow the algorithm to
use a modiﬁed policy πi = βiπ∗ + (1−βi)ˆπi at iteration
i that queries the expert to choose controls a fraction of the
time while collecting the next dataset. This is often desir-
able in practice as the ﬁrst few policies, with relatively few
datapoints, may make many more mistakes and visit states
that are irrelevant as the policy improves.
We will typically useβ1 = 1 so that we do not have to spec-
ify an initial policy ˆπ1 before getting data from the expert’s
behavior. Then we could chooseβi =pi−1 to have a prob-
ability of using the expert that decays exponentially as in
SMILe and SEARN. We show below the only requirement
is that{βi} be a sequence such thatβN = 1
N
∑N
i=1βi→ 0
asN→∞ . The simple, parameter-free version of the al-
gorithm described above is the special case βi =I(i = 1)
forI the indicator function, which often performs best in
practice (see Section 5). The general DAGGER algorithm is
detailed in Algorithm 3.1. The main result of our analysis
in the next section is the following guarantee for DAGGER .
Let π1:N denote the sequence of policies π1,π 2,...,π N .
Assume𝓁 is strongly convex and bounded overΠ. Suppose
βi≤ (1−α)i−1 for alli for some constantα independent
of T . Let ϵN = minπ∈Π 1
N
∑N
i=1 Es∼dπi
[𝓁(s,π )] be the
true loss of the best policy in hindsight. Then the following
holds in the inﬁnite sample case (inﬁnite number of sample
trajectories at each iteration):
Theorem 3.1. For DAGGER , if N is ˜O(T ) there exists a
policy ˆπ∈ ˆπ1:N s.t. Es∼dˆπ[𝓁(s, ˆπ)]≤ϵN +O(1/T )
In particular, this holds for the policy ˆπ =
arg minπ∈ˆπ1:N Es∼dπ[𝓁(s,π )]. 3 If the task cost
function C corresponds to (or is upper bounded by) the
surrogate loss 𝓁 then this bound tells us directly that
J(ˆπ)≤ TϵN +O(1). For arbitrary task cost function C,
then if 𝓁 is an upper bound on the 0-1 loss with respect to
π∗, combining this result with Theorem 2.2 yields that:
Theorem 3.2. For DAGGER , ifN is ˜O(uT ) there exists a
policy ˆπ∈ ˆπ1:N s.t.J(ˆπ)≤J(π∗) +uTϵN +O(1).
Finite Sample Results In the ﬁnite sample case, sup-
pose we sample m trajectories with πi at each it-
eration i, and denote this dataset Di. Let ˆϵN =
minπ∈Π 1
N
∑N
i=1 Es∼Di[𝓁(s,π )] be the training loss of the
best policy on the sampled trajectories, then using Azuma-
Hoeffding’s inequality leads to the following guarantee:
Theorem 3.3. For DAGGER , ifN isO(T 2 log(1/δ)) and
m isO(1) then with probability at least1−δ there exists a
policy ˆπ∈ ˆπ1:N s.t. Es∼dˆπ[𝓁(s, ˆπ)]≤ ˆϵN +O(1/T )
A more reﬁned analysis taking advantage of the strong con-
vexity of the loss function (Kakade and Tewari, 2009) may
lead to tighter generalization bounds that requireN only of
order ˜O(T log(1/δ)). Similarly:
Theorem 3.4. For DAGGER , if N is O(u2T 2 log(1/δ))
and m is O(1) then with probability at least 1−δ there
exists a policyˆπ∈ ˆπ1:N s.t.J(ˆπ)≤J(π∗)+uT ˆϵN +O(1).
4 THEORETICAL ANALYSIS
The theoretical analysis of DAGGER only relies on the no-
regret property of the underlying Follow-The-Leader algo-
rithm on strongly convex losses (Kakade and Tewari, 2009)
which picks the sequence of policies ˆπ1:N . Hence the pre-
sented results also hold forany other no regret online learn-
ing algorithm we would apply to our imitation learning set-
ting. In particular, we can consider the results here a re-
duction of imitation learning to no-regret online learning
where we treat mini-batches of trajectories under a single
policy as a single online-learning example. We ﬁrst brieﬂy
review concepts of online learning and no regret that will
be used for this analysis.
4.1 Online Learning
In online learning, an algorithm must provide a policyπn at
iterationn which incurs a loss𝓁n(πn). After observing this
loss, the algorithm can provide a different policy πn+1 for
the next iteration which will incur loss 𝓁n+1(πn+1). The
3It is not necessary to ﬁnd the best policy in the sequence
that minimizes the loss under its distribution; the same guarantee
holds for the policy which uniformly randomly picks one policy
in the sequence ˆπ1:N and executes that policy forT steps.

=== PDF PAGE 5 ===
     631
Stéphane Ross, Geoffrey J. Gordon, J. Andrew Bagnell
loss functions𝓁n+1 may vary in an unknown or even adver-
sarial fashion over time. A no-regret algorithm is an algo-
rithm that produces a sequence of policies π1,π 2,...,π N
such that the average regret with respect to the best policy
in hindsight goes to 0 asN goes to∞:
1
N
N∑
i=1
𝓁i(πi)− min
π∈Π
1
N
N∑
i=1
𝓁i(π)≤γN (3)
for limN→∞γN = 0 . Many no-regret algorithms guar-
antee that γN is ˜O( 1
N ) (e.g. when 𝓁 is strongly convex)
(Hazan et al., 2006; Kakade and Shalev-Shwartz, 2008;
Kakade and Tewari, 2009).
4.2 No Regret Algorithms Guarantees
Now we show that no-regret algorithms can be used to ﬁnd
a policy which has good performance guarantees under its
own distribution of states in our imitation learning setting.
To do so, we must choose the loss functions to be the loss
under the distribution of states of the current policy chosen
by the online algorithm:𝓁i(π) = Es∼dπi
[𝓁(s,π )].
For our analysis of DA GGER , we need to bound the to-
tal variation distance between the distribution of states en-
countered by ˆπi andπi, which continues to call the expert.
The following lemma is useful:
Lemma 4.1. ||dπi−dˆπi||1≤ 2Tβi.
Proof. Letd the distribution of states over T steps condi-
tioned onπi pickingπ∗ at least once overT steps. Sinceπi
always executes ˆπi overT steps with probability (1−βi)T
we havedπi = (1−βi)Tdˆπi + (1− (1−βi)T )d. Thus
||dπi−dˆπi||1
= (1− (1−βi)T )||d−dˆπi||1
≤ 2(1− (1−βi)T )
≤ 2Tβi
The last inequality follows from the fact that (1−β)T ≥
1−βT for anyβ∈ [0, 1].
This is only better than the trivial bound||dπi−dˆπi||1≤ 2
for βi ≤ 1
T . Assume βi is non-increasing and deﬁne
nβ the largest n ≤ N such that βn > 1
T . Let ϵN =
minπ∈Π 1
N
∑N
i=1 Es∼dπi
[𝓁(s,π )] the loss of the best pol-
icy in hindsight afterN iterations and let𝓁max be an upper
bound on the loss, i.e. 𝓁i(s, ˆπi)≤ 𝓁max for all policies ˆπi,
and states such thatdˆπi(s)> 0. We have the following:
Theorem 4.1. For DAGGER , there exists a policy ˆπ ∈
ˆπ1:N s.t. Es∼dˆπ[𝓁(s, ˆπ)] ≤ ϵN + γN + 2𝓁max
N [nβ +
T ∑N
i=nβ+1βi], forγN the average regret of ˆπ1:N .
Proof. The last lemma implies Es∼dˆπi
(𝓁i(s, ˆπi)) ≤
Es∼dπi
(𝓁i(s, ˆπi)) + 2 𝓁max min(1,Tβ i). Then:
minˆπ∈ˆπ1:N Es∼dˆπ[𝓁(s, ˆπ)]
≤ 1
N
∑N
i=1 Es∼dˆπi
(𝓁(s, ˆπi))
≤ 1
N
∑N
i=1[Es∼dπi
(𝓁(s, ˆπi)) + 2𝓁max min(1,Tβ i)]
≤γN + 2𝓁max
N [nβ +T ∑N
i=nβ+1βi] + minπ∈Π
∑N
i=1𝓁i(π)
=γN +ϵN + 2𝓁max
N [nβ +T ∑N
i=nβ+1βi]
Under an error reduction assumption that for any input dis-
tribution, there is some policy π ∈ Π that achieves sur-
rogate loss of ϵ, this implies we are guaranteed to ﬁnd a
policy ˆπ which achieves ϵ surrogate loss under its own
state distribution in the limit, provided βN → 0. For in-
stance, if we choose βi to be of the form (1−α)i−1, then
1
N [nβ +T ∑N
i=nβ+1βi]≤ 1
Nα [logT + 1] and this extra
penalty becomes negligible for N as ˜O(T ). As we need
at least ˜O(T ) iterations to make γN negligible, the num-
ber of iterations required by DA GGER is similar to that re-
quired by any no-regret algorithm. Note that this is not
as strong as the general error or regret reductions consid-
ered in (Beygelzimer et al., 2005; Ross and Bagnell, 2010;
Daumé III et al., 2009) which require only classiﬁcation:
we require a no-regret method or strongly convex surrogate
loss function, a stronger (albeit common) assumption.
Finite Sample Case: The previous results hold if the on-
line learning algorithm observes the inﬁnite sample loss,
i.e. the loss on the true distribution of trajectories induced
by the current policyπi. In practice however the algorithm
would only observe its loss on a small sample of trajecto-
ries at each iteration. We wish to bound the true loss under
its own distribution of the best policy in the sequence as a
function of the regret on the ﬁnite sample of trajectories.
At each iteration i, we assume the algorithm samples m
trajectories using πi and then observes the loss 𝓁i(π) =
Es∼Di(𝓁(s,π )), forDi the dataset of those m trajectories.
The online learner guarantees 1
N
∑N
i=1 Es∼Di(𝓁(s,πi))−
minπ∈Π 1
N
∑N
i=1 Es∼Di(𝓁(s,π )) ≤ γN . Let ˆϵN =
minπ∈Π 1
N
∑N
i=1 Es∼Di[𝓁(s,π )] the training loss of the
best policy in hindsight. Following a similar analysis to
Cesa-Bianchi et al. (2004), we obtain:
Theorem 4.2. For DAGGER , with probability at least1−δ,
there exists a policy ˆπ∈ ˆπ1:N s.t. Es∼dˆπ[𝓁(s, ˆπ)]≤ ˆϵN +
γN + 2𝓁max
N [nβ +T ∑N
i=nβ+1βi] +𝓁max
√
2 log(1/δ)
mN , for
γN the average regret of ˆπ1:N .
Proof. LetYij be the difference between the expected per
step loss of ˆπi under state distribution dπi and the aver-
age per step loss of ˆπi under the jth sample trajectory
with πi at iteration i. The random variables Yij over all
i ∈ {1, 2,...,N } and j ∈ {1, 2,...,m } are all zero
mean, bounded in [−𝓁max,𝓁 max] and form a martingale
(considering the order Y11,Y 12,...,Y 1m,Y 21,...,Y Nm ).
By Azuma-Hoeffding’s inequality 1
mN
∑N
i=1
∑m
j=1Yij≤

=== PDF PAGE 6 ===
     632
A Reduction of Imitation Learning and Structured Prediction to No-Regret Online Learning
𝓁max
√
2 log(1/δ)
mN with probability at least 1−δ. Hence, we
obtain that with probability at least 1−δ:
minˆπ∈ˆπ1:N Es∼dˆπ[𝓁(s, ˆπ)]
≤ 1
N
∑N
i=1 Es∼dˆπi
[𝓁(s, ˆπi)]
≤ 1
N
∑N
i=1 Es∼dπi
[𝓁(s, ˆπi)] + 2𝓁max
N [nβ +T ∑N
i=nβ+1βi]
= 1
N
∑N
i=1 Es∼Di[𝓁(s, ˆπi)] + 1
mN
∑N
i=1
∑m
j=1Yij
+ 2𝓁max
N [nβ +T ∑N
i=nβ+1βi]
≤ 1
N
∑N
i=1 Es∼Di[𝓁(s, ˆπi)] +𝓁max
√
2 log(1/δ)
mN
+ 2𝓁max
N [nβ +T ∑N
i=nβ+1βi]
≤ ˆϵN +γN +𝓁max
√
2 log(1/δ)
mN + 2𝓁max
N [nβ +T ∑N
i=nβ+1βi]
The use of Azuma-Hoeffding’s inequality suggests we need
Nm in O(T 2 log(1/δ)) for the generalization error to be
O(1/T ) and negligible overT steps. Leveraging the strong
convexity of𝓁 as in (Kakade and Tewari, 2009) may lead to
a tighter bound requiring onlyO(T log(T/δ )) trajectories.
5 EXPERIMENTS
To demonstrate the efﬁcacy and scalability of DAGGER , we
apply it to two challenging imitation learning problems and
a sequence labeling task (handwriting recognition).
5.1 Super Tux Kart
Super Tux Kart is a 3D racing game similar to the popular
Mario Kart. Our goal is to train the computer to steer the
kart moving at ﬁxed speed on a particular race track, based
on the current game image features as input (see Figure 1).
A human expert is used to provide demonstrations of the
correct steering (analog joystick value in [-1,1]) for each of
the observed game images. For all methods, we use a linear
Figure 1: Image from Super Tux Kart’s Star Track.
controller as the base learner which updates the steering at
5Hz based on the vector of image features4.
4Features x: LAB color values of each pixel in a 25x19 re-
sized image of the 800x600 image; output steering: ˆy =wTx+b
where w, b minimizes ridge regression objective: L(w,b ) =
1
n
Pn
i=1(wTxi +b −yi)2 + λ
2wTw, for regularizerλ = 10−3.
We compare performance on a race track called Star Track.
As this track ﬂoats in space, the kart can fall off the track at
any point (the kart is repositioned at the center of the track
when this occurs). We measure performance in terms of the
average number of falls per lap. For SMILe and DAGGER ,
we used 1 lap of training per iteration (∼1000 data points)
and run both methods for 20 iterations. For SMILe we
choose parameterα = 0.1 as in Ross and Bagnell (2010),
and for DAGGER the parameterβi =I(i = 1) forI the in-
dicator function. Figure 2 shows 95% conﬁdence intervals
on the average falls per lap of each method after 1, 5, 10, 15
and 20 iterations as a function of the total number of train-
ing data collected. We ﬁrst observe that with the baseline
0 0.5 1 1.5 2 2.5
x 10
4
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
4.5
Number of Training Data
Average Falls Per Lap
 
 
DAgger (βi = I(i=1))
SMILe (α = 0.1)
Supervised
Figure 2: Average falls/lap as a function of training data.
supervised approach where training always occurs under
the expert’s trajectories that performance does not improve
as more data is collected. This is because most of the train-
ing laps are all very similar and do not help the learner to
learn how to recover from mistakes it makes. With SMILe
we obtain some improvements but the policy after 20 iter-
ations still falls off the track about twice per lap on aver-
age. This is in part due to the stochasticity of the policy
which sometimes makes bad choices of actions. For DAG-
GER, we were able to obtain a policy that never falls off
the track after 15 iterations of training. Though even after
5 iterations, the policy we obtain almost never falls off the
track and is signiﬁcantly outperforming both SMILe and
the baseline supervised approach. Furthermore, the policy
obtained by DA GGER is smoother and looks qualitatively
better than the policy obtained with SMILe. A video avail-
able on YouTube (Ross, 2010a) shows a qualitative com-
parison of the behavior obtained with each method.
5.2 Super Mario Bros.
Super Mario Bros. is a platform video game where the
character, Mario, must move across each stage by avoid-

=== PDF PAGE 7 ===
     633
Stéphane Ross, Geoffrey J. Gordon, J. Andrew Bagnell
ing being hit by enemies and falling into gaps, and before
running out of time. We used the simulator from a recent
Mario Bros. AI competition (Togelius and Karakovskiy,
2009) which can randomly generate stages of varying difﬁ-
culty (more difﬁcult gaps and types of enemies). Our goal
is to train the computer to play this game based on the cur-
rent game image features as input (see Figure 3). Our ex-
pert in this scenario is a near-optimal planning algorithm
that has full access to the game’s internal state and can
simulate exactly the consequence of future actions. An ac-
tion consists of 4 binary variables indicating which subset
of buttons we should press in{left,right,jump,speed}. For
Figure 3: Captured image from Super Mario Bros.
all methods, we use 4 independent linear SVM as the base
learner which update the 4 binary actions at 5Hz based on
the vector of image features5.
We compare performance in terms of the average distance
travelled by Mario per stage before dying, running out of
time or completing the stage, on randomly generated stages
of difﬁculty 1 with a time limit of 60 seconds to complete
the stage. The total distance of each stage varies but is
around 4200-4300 on average, so performance can vary
roughly in [0,4300]. Stages of difﬁculty 1 are fairly easy
for an average human player but contain most types of en-
emies and gaps, except with fewer enemies and gaps than
stages of harder difﬁculties. We compare performance of
DAgger, SMILe and SEARN 6 to the supervised approach
(Sup). With each approach we collect 5000 data points per
iteration (each stage is about 150 data points if run to com-
pletion) and run the methods for 20 iterations. For SMILe
we choose parameterα = 0.1 (Sm0.1) as in Ross and Bag-
5For the input features x: each image is discretized in a grid
of 22x22 cells centered around Mario; 14 binary features de-
scribe each cell (types of ground, enemies, blocks and other spe-
cial items); a history of those features over the last 4 images is
used, in addition to other features describing the last 6 actions
and the state of Mario (small,big,ﬁre,touches ground), for a to-
tal of 27152 binary features (very sparse). The kth output binary
variable ˆyk = I(wT
kx +bk > 0), where wk,bk optimizes the
SVM objective with regularizerλ = 10−4 using stochastic gradi-
ent descent (Ratliff et al., 2007; Bottou, 2009).
6We use the same cost-to-go approximation in Daumé III et al.
(2009); in this case SMILe and SEARN differs only in how the
weights in the mixture are updated at each iteration.
nell (2010). For DA GGER we obtain results with differ-
ent choice of the parameter βi: 1) βi = I(i = 1) for I
the indicator function (D0); 2) βi = pi−1 for all values
ofp∈{ 0.1, 0.2,..., 0.9}. We report the best results ob-
tained withp = 0.5 (D0.5). We also report the results with
p = 0.9 (D0.9) which shows the slower convergence of
using the expert more frequently at later iterations. Simi-
larly for SEARN, we obtain results with all choice of α in
{0.1, 0.2,..., 1}. We report the best results obtained with
α = 0.4 (Se0.4). We also report results with α = 1.0
(Se1), which shows the unstability of such a pure policy
iteration approach. Figure 4 shows 95% conﬁdence inter-
vals on the average distance travelled per stage at each it-
eration as a function of the total number of training data
collected. Again here we observe that with the supervised
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
x 10
4
1000
1200
1400
1600
1800
2000
2200
2400
2600
2800
3000
3200
Number of Training Data
Average Distance Travelled Per Stage
 
 
D0 D0.5 D0.9 Se1 Se0.4 Sm0.1 Sup
Figure 4: Average distance/stage as a function of data.
approach, performance stagnates as we collect more data
from the expert demonstrations, as this does not help the
particular errors the learned controller makes. In particu-
lar, a reason the supervised approach gets such a low score
is that under the learned controller, Mario is often stuck at
some location against an obstacle instead of jumping over
it. Since the expert always jumps over obstacles at a sig-
niﬁcant distance away, the controller did not learn how to
get unstuck in situations where it is right next to an ob-
stacle. On the other hand, all the other iterative methods
perform much better as they eventually learn to get unstuck
in those situations by encountering them at the later iter-
ations. Again in this experiment, DA GGER outperforms
SMILe, and also outperforms SEARN for all choice of α
we considered. When using βi = 0.9i−1, convergence is
signiﬁcantly slower could have beneﬁted from more itera-
tions as performance was still improving at the end of the
20 iterations. Choosing 0.5i−1 yields slightly better per-
formance (3030) then with the indicator function (2980).
This is potentially due to the large number of data gener-
ated where mario is stuck at the same location in the early
iterations when using the indicator; whereas using the ex-

=== PDF PAGE 8 ===
     634
A Reduction of Imitation Learning and Structured Prediction to No-Regret Online Learning
pert a small fraction of the time still allows to observe those
locations but also unstucks mario and makes it collect a
wider variety of useful data. A video available on YouTube
(Ross, 2010b) also shows a qualitative comparison of the
behavior obtained with each method.
5.3 Handwriting Recognition
Finally, we demonstrate the efﬁcacy of our approach on a
structured prediction problem involving recognizing hand-
written words given the sequence of images of each charac-
ter in the word. We follow Daumé III et al. (2009) in adopt-
ing a view of structured prediction as a degenerate form of
imitation learning where the system dynamics are deter-
ministic and trivial in simply passing on earlier predictions
made as inputs for future predictions. We use the dataset
of Taskar et al. (2003) which has been used extensively in
the literature to compare several structured prediction ap-
proaches. This dataset contains roughly 6600 words (for
a total of over 52000 characters) partitioned in 10 folds.
We consider the large dataset experiment which consists of
training on 9 folds and testing on 1 fold and repeating this
over all folds. Performance is measured in terms of the
character accuracy on the test folds.
We consider predicting the word by predicting each charac-
ter in sequence in a left to right order, using the previously
predicted character to help predict the next and a linear
SVM7, following the greedy SEARN approach in Daumé
III et al. (2009). Here we compare our method to SMILe,
as well as SEARN (using the same approximations used
in Daumé III et al. (2009)). We also compare these ap-
proaches to two baseline, a non-structured approach which
simply predicts each character independently and the su-
pervised training approach where training is conducted
with the previous character always correctly labeled. Again
we try all choice ofα∈{ 0.1, 0.2,..., 1} for SEARN, and
report results for α = 0.1, α = 1 (pure policy iteration)
and the best α = 0.8, and run all approaches for 20 itera-
tions. Figure 5 shows the performance of each approach on
the test folds after each iteration as a function of training
data. The baseline result without structure achieves 82%
character accuracy by just using an SVM that predicts each
character independently. When adding the previous charac-
ter feature, but training with always the previous character
correctly labeled (supervised approach), performance in-
creases up to 83.6%. Using DAgger increases performance
further to 85.5%. Surprisingly, we observe SEARN with
α = 1, which is a pure policy iteration approach performs
very well on this experiment, similarly to the best α = 0.8
and DAgger. Because there is only a small part of the in-
put that is inﬂuenced by the current policy (the previous
7Each character is 8x16 binary pixels (128 input features); 26
binary features are used to encode the previously predicted let-
ter in the word. We train the multiclass SVM using the all-pairs
reduction to binary classiﬁcation (Beygelzimer et al., 2005).
0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 18 20
0.81
0.815
0.82
0.825
0.83
0.835
0.84
0.845
0.85
0.855
0.86
Training Iteration
Test Folds Character Accuracy
 
 
DAgger (βi=I(i=1))
SEARN (α=1)
SEARN (α=0.8)
SEARN (α=0.1)
SMILe (α=0.1)
Supervised
No Structure
Figure 5: Character accuracy as a function of iteration.
predicted character feature) this makes this approach not
as unstable as in general reinforcement/imitation learning
problems (as we saw in the previous experiment). SEARN
and SMILe with smallα = 0.1 performs similarly but sig-
niﬁcantly worse than DAgger. Note that we chose the sim-
plest (greedy, one-pass) decoding to illustrate the beneﬁts
of the DAGGER approach with respect to existing reduc-
tions. Similar techniques can be applied to multi-pass or
beam-search decoding leading to results that are competi-
tive with the state-of-the-art.
6 FUTURE WORK
We show that by batching over iterations of interaction
with a system, no-regret methods, including the presented
DAGGER approach can provide a learning reduction with
strong performance guarantees in both imitation learning
and structured prediction. In future work, we will consider
more sophisticated strategies than simple greedy forward
decoding for structured prediction, as well as using base
classiﬁers that rely on Inverse Optimal Control (Abbeel and
Ng, 2004; Ratliff et al., 2006) techniques to learn a cost
function for a planner to aid prediction in imitation learn-
ing. Further we believe techniques similar to those pre-
sented, by leveraging a cost-to-go estimate, may provide
an understanding of the success of online methods for rein-
forcement learning and suggest a similar data-aggregation
method that can guarantee performance in such settings.
Acknowledgements
This work is supported by the ONR MURI grant N00014-
09-1-1052, Reasoning in Reduced Information Spaces, and
by the National Sciences and Engineering Research Coun-
cil of Canada (NSERC).

=== PDF PAGE 9 ===
     635
Stéphane Ross, Geoffrey J. Gordon, J. Andrew Bagnell
References
P. Abbeel and A. Y . Ng. Apprenticeship learning via in-
verse reinforcement learning. In Proceedings of the 21st
International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML),
2004.
B. D. Argall, S. Chernova, M. Veloso, and B. Browning. A
survey of robot learning from demonstration. Robotics
and Autonomous Systems, 2009.
A. Beygelzimer, V . Dani, T. Hayes, J. Langford, and
B. Zadrozny. Error limiting reductions between classi-
ﬁcation tasks. In Proceedings of the 22nd International
Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), 2005.
L. Bottou. sgd code, 2009. URL http://www.leon.
bottou.org/projects/sgd.
N. Cesa-Bianchi, A. Conconi, and C. Gentile. On the gen-
eralization ability of on-line learning algorithms. 2004.
S. Chernova and M. Veloso. Interactive policy learning
through conﬁdence-based autonomy. 2009.
H. Daumé III, J. Langford, and D. Marcu. Search-based
structured prediction. Machine Learning, 2009.
E. Hazan, A. Kalai, S. Kale, and A. Agarwal. Logarith-
mic regret algorithms for online convex optimization. In
Proceedings of the 19th annual conference on Computa-
tional Learning Theory (COLT), 2006.
M. Kääriäinen. Lower bounds for reductions, 2006.
Atomic Learning workshop.
S. Kakade and J. Langford. Approximately optimal ap-
proximate reinforcement learning. In Proceedings of
the 19th International Conference on Machine Learning
(ICML), 2002.
S. Kakade and S. Shalev-Shwartz. Mind the duality gap:
Logarithmic regret algorithms for online optimization.
In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems
(NIPS), 2008.
S. Kakade and A. Tewari. On the generalization abil-
ity of online strongly convex programming algorithms.
In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems
(NIPS), 2009.
N. Ratliff, D. Bradley, J. A. Bagnell, and J. Chestnutt.
Boosting structured prediction for imitation learning.
In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems
(NIPS), 2006.
N. Ratliff, J. A. Bagnell, and M. Zinkevich. (Online) sub-
gradient methods for structured prediction. In Proceed-
ings of the International Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelli-
gence and Statistics (AISTATS), 2007.
S. Ross. Comparison of imitation learning approaches
on Super Tux Kart, 2010a. URL http://www.
youtube.com/watch?v=V00npNnWzSU.
S. Ross. Comparison of imitation learning approaches
on Super Mario Bros, 2010b. URL http://www.
youtube.com/watch?v=anOI0xZ3kGM.
S. Ross and J. A. Bagnell. Efﬁcient reductions for imita-
tion learning. In Proceedings of the 13th International
Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Statistics (AIS-
TATS), 2010.
S. Schaal. Is imitation learning the route to humanoid
robots? In Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 1999.
D. Silver, J. A. Bagnell, and A. Stentz. High performance
outdoor navigation from overhead data using imitation
learning. In Proceedings of Robotics Science and Sys-
tems (RSS), 2008.
B. Taskar, C. Guestrin, and D. Koller. Max margin markov
networks. In Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems (NIPS), 2003.
J. Togelius and S. Karakovskiy. Mario AI Competition,
2009. URL http://julian.togelius.com/
mariocompetition2009.