=== PDF PAGE 1 ===
OffRIPP: Offline RL-based Informative Path Planning
Srikar Babu Gadipudi 1, Srujan Deolasee 2, Siva Kailas 3, Wenhao Luo 4, Katia Sycara 2, Woojun Kim 2
Abstract— Informative path planning (IPP) is a crucial task
in robotics, where agents must design paths to gather valuable
information about a target environment while adhering to
resource constraints. Reinforcement learning (RL) has been
shown to be effective for IPP, however, it requires environment
interactions, which are risky and expensive in practice. To
address this problem, we propose an offline RL-based IPP
framework that optimizes information gain without requiring
real-time interaction during training, offering safety and cost-
efficiency by avoiding interaction, as well as superior perfor-
mance and fast computation during execution—key advantages
of RL. Our framework leverages batch-constrained reinforce-
ment learning to mitigate extrapolation errors, enabling the
agent to learn from pre-collected datasets generated by arbi-
trary algorithms. We validate the framework through extensive
simulations and real-world experiments. The numerical results
show that our framework outperforms the baselines, demon-
strating the effectiveness of the proposed approach.
Index Terms— Informative Path Planning; Offline Reinforce-
ment Learning
I. INTRODUCTION
Informative path planning (IPP) is a critical problem in
robotics and autonomous systems, where the goal is to design
a path that enables an agent to acquire valuable information
about a quantity of interest within a given environment while
adhering to resource constraints, such as a robot’s battery
life. IPP has numerous applications, including environmental
monitoring [1], search and rescue operations [2], and preci-
sion agriculture [3]. The challenge is to ensure that the agent
accurately approximates the true interest map.
Traditional methods for IPP, [4], [5], rely on sampling
techniques that, while effective, can be computationally
intensive and time-consuming. They typically require signif-
icant computational resources and often struggle to scale in
large, complex environments. Consequently, there is growing
interest in leveraging reinforcement learning (RL) as a po-
tential solution to the IPP problem [6], [7], [8]. RL offers a
promising avenue for IPP by enabling agents to learn optimal
policies through interactions with the environment. However,
conventional RL approaches require extensive real-time in-
teractions, making training costly and potentially hazardous,
especially in safety-critical environments. To address this,
offline RL, which trains an agent using only pre-collected
1Srikar Babu Gadipudi is with the Department of Electrical Engineering,
Indian Institute of Technology Madras. ee21b138@smail.iitm.ac.in
2Srujan Deolasee, Katia Sycara, and Woojun Kim are
with the Robotics Institute at Carnegie Mellon University.
{sdeolase, sycara, woojunk}@andrew.cmu.edu
3Siva Kailas is with the School of Interactive Computing at Georgia
Institute of Technology {skailas3}@gatech.edu
4Wenhao Luo is with the Department of Computer Science, University
of North Carolina at Charlotte {wenhao.luo}@uncc.edu
Fig. 1: Overview of the flow for the proposed framework:
training an RL policy using a dataset generated by arbitrary
algorithms, followed by deployment in the test environment.
datasets without real-time interactions, has emerged as a
viable alternative [9].
In this paper, we propose an Offline RL-based IPP
framework, named OffRIPP, that plans paths to maximize
information gain without real-time interactions with the envi-
ronment during training. We train an RL agent to maximize
information gain within a constrained budget, using datasets
generated by arbitrary IPP algorithms, including traditional
sampling-based approaches. Specifically, we leverage batch-
constrained reinforcement learning [10] for IPP to mitigate
extrapolation errors—these occur due to inaccurate value
estimation caused by the mismatch between the state-action
distribution in the dataset and the current policy. After
training, the RL policy can be deployed directly in the test
environment. The overall flow is illustrated in Fig. 1. Our
framework provides an efficient and safe solution, combining
the advantages of RL—fast planning time during execution
and superior performance—with the benefits of traditional
approaches that require no interaction with the environment.
We validate our approach through extensive simulations
and real-world experiments, demonstrating the advantages
of our offline RL framework in improving performance
and reducing operational costs compared to several baseline
methods. We evaluate the proposed framework on top of two
existing RL-based IPP algorithms in two different environ-
ments: a 2D light-intensity task and a 3D fruit identifica-
tion task. The numerical results show that our framework
outperforms the baselines, including traditional approaches,
online RL-based algorithms trained in an offline manner,
and behavior cloning, demonstrating the effectiveness of the
proposed framework.
The main contributions of this work are summarized as
follows: (i) To the best of our knowledge, this is the first
arXiv:2409.16830v1  [cs.RO]  25 Sep 2024

=== PDF PAGE 2 ===
work to leverage offline RL for IPP, training solely on
given datasets. (ii) Our approach can be integrated with any
existing online RL-based IPP algorithm; we demonstrate this
by using both CAtNIPP [6] and another RL-based IPP [8]
as subroutines. (iii) We demonstrate the effectiveness of our
approach in terms of solution quality and planning time, and
provide an analysis of dataset quality.
II. B ACKGROUND AND RELATED WORKS
A. Offline Reinforcement Learning
RL trains an agent through interaction with an environ-
ment, and the procedure is formulated as a Markov Decision
Process, defined by the tuple <S,A,P,r,γ >, whereS is
the state space, A is the action space, P is the transition
probability function, r is the reward function, and γ is the
discount factor. Specifically, at each time step t, the agent’s
policy π selects an action at ∈ Abased on the current
state st ∈ S. The environment responds by providing a
reward rt = r(st,at) and transitioning to the next state
st+1 ∼ P(st+1|st,at). By repeating this procedure in an
online learning fashion, the policy is trained to maximize
the expected return, E[P∞
t=0γtrt]. Here, to evaluate and
improve the policy, most RL algorithms estimate the value
function under the current policy, such as Qπ(s,a ) =
Eπ[P∞
t=0γtrt| s,a ], which is the expected return over the
trajectory that follows policy π after executing action a in
states. One way to estimate this is temporal-difference (TD)
learning [11], which can be written as
Qπ(s,a )← Es′ [r +γQπ(s′,π (s′))], (1)
wheres′ is the next state. The policy is trained to maximize
the estimated value function. Thus, accurate estimation of the
value function is crucial, as it directly affects policy learning.
Offline RL trains an agent on a fixed dataset previously
collected from arbitrary policies, without any interaction with
the environment during training [12], [9], [13]. By avoiding
interaction, which is often risky and expensive in real-
world applications, offline RL enables the development of a
decision-making agent that maximizes the expected sum of
rewards. A significant challenge in offline RL is extrapolation
error caused by the mismatch between the dataset and the
actual state-action distribution of the current policy. This
leads to inaccurate value estimates [10]. For example, in
TD learning, if a state-action pair (s′,π (s′)) is not included
in the dataset, the estimate of the value function for this
state-action pair can be highly inaccurate. In other words, the
expectation in Eq. 1 has a large approximation error, which
accumulates in the estimate of Qπ(s,a ) in Eq. 1. Thus, a
greater mismatch between the dataset and the state-action
distribution of the current policy increases the likelihood of
approximation error.
To handle extrapolation error, most offline RL algorithms
make the learning policy similar to the behavior policy,
which was used to generate the dataset [10], [14], [9], in
order to reduce the mismatch. For instance, Conservative
Q-learning penalizes Q-values for actions not seen in the
dataset, thereby discouraging the policy from selecting out-
of-distribution actions [9]. TD3+BC [15] integrates TD3 [16]
with behavior cloning, combining exploration and exploita-
tion while staying close to the dataset’s actions. Batch-
constrained Q-learning constrains the policy to select actions
observed in the dataset [10].
B. Informative Path Planning
The goal of IPP is to find a trajectory ψ∗ that maximizes
the information gain within the given budget [17], [18], [19],
and the objective function is written as
ψ∗ = arg max
ψ
I(ψ), s.t. C(ψ)≤B, (2)
where I : ψ → R+ and C : ψ → R+ represent the
information gain and cost along trajectory ψ.B∈ R+ is the
limit of the budget. The type of information gain depends on
the domain, e.g., fire intensity in the wildfire domain. To find
a solution for IPP, traditional IPP algorithms utilize sampling
methods [4], [20], [21], [1]. However, they require significant
computational resources for planning, which limits their
practicality in real-world applications.
RL-based IPP: RL has been utilized to learn an IPP
solver to address the aforementioned problem of traditional
IPP solvers and further enhance performance [22], [6],
[8]. RL-based IPP algorithms consist of three components:
constructing a representation of the entire search map, mod-
eling environmental phenomena, and training an RL agent
to select a path that maximizes information gain. As an
example, CAtNIPP [6] constructs a representation to cover a
continuous 2D search domain using a probabilistic roadmap
(PRM) [23], which reduces the complexity of the search
space. At the start of each episode, the PRM generates
a graph G = (V,E ) with nodes V and edges E, where
each node is connected to k neighbors, and the agent is
initialized at a random node. At each time step, the agent
moves to one of its neighboring nodes and observes the
environmental phenomenon at its new location. To model this
phenomenon across the search space, Gaussian Process (GP)
regression, a non-parametric Bayesian method that uses sta-
tistical inference to capture relationships between data points,
is used [24], [25]. Specifically, the mean and covariance of a
test locationX∗, given the observed locationsX, are inferred
as: µ = K(X∗,X )[K(X,X ) + σ2
nI]−1(Y− µ(X )),P =
K(X∗,X∗) − K(X∗,X )[K(X,X ) + σ2
nI]−1K(X,X )T ,
where K(·,·) is the kernel function, σ2
n is a hyperparameter
of the GP. At each time step, the agent predicts the environ-
mental phenomenon based on the GP and uses this prediction
as input to the RL policy. After observing the environmental
phenomenon at the new location, the GP is updated based on
the new observation value. The output of the GP is incorpo-
rated into the graph, referred to as the GP-augmented graph.
The RL policy uses the agent’s current location, budget,
trajectory history, and the GP-augmented graph, as inputs.
The RL agent then selects one of the neighboring nodes. To
train the agent to maximize the expected reduction in GP
uncertainty, the reward function is designed as the normal-
ized information gain,rt = (Tr(Pt−1)−Tr(Pt))/ Tr(Pt−1),

=== PDF PAGE 3 ===
with a negative reward term, rd =−α·Tr(Pd), added at the
end of each episode. CAtNIPP uses PPO [26] for training.
As another example, [8] proposes an RL-based IPP algo-
rithm for 3D environments with unknown obstacles. To avoid
collisions, they introduce a dynamically constructed graph
representing the robot’s local region, which is used as input
to the RL agent. Additionally, they propose a new reward
function to balance exploration and exploitation. Apart from
these components, this 3D RL-based IPP algorithm follows
the CAtNIPP framework.
These RL-based IPP methods has been shown to be
effective in terms of both solution quality and planning
time in test time. However, they require interaction with the
environment to collect data which is expensive, risky, and
time-consuming. Thus, we introduce offline RL to the IPP
problem. To the best of our knowledge, this work is the first
to develop an offline RL-based IPP solver.
III. O UR APPROACH
We propose an offline RL-based Informative Path Plan-
ning algorithm, OffRIPP, that trains an IPP solver using
existing datasets without requiring interaction with the envi-
ronment. By avoiding costly and risky real-time interactions,
OffRIPP is applicable to real-world scenarios. In addition,
OffRIPP can be combined with any arbitrary RL-based IPP
algorithm, including CAtNIPP [6] and 3D RL-based IPP [8].
A. Problem Formulation
Dataset. The dataset D is assumed to be generated by
arbitrary algorithms and consists of D episodes, with each
episode containing sequences of states, actions, and rewards.
Here, the states include a graph where each node contains
a position and the agent’s prediction of the environment
phenomenon, as well as the planning state, which includes
the current agent position and the remaining budget. The
actions represent the next node the agent moves to, and the
rewards correspond to the GP uncertainty.
By utilizing the dataset, our goal is to train an RL agent
that plans a path maximizing the information gain under the
budget constraints. Note that given that the dataset includes
PRMs and predictions of environmental phenomena through
GP regression, our approach does not require generating
these components during training but instead leverages the
given dataset. Upon completion of the RL agent’s training,
we deploy it in the test environment for evaluation.
B. Offline RL-based Informative path planning
It is known that naive training of RL algorithms, such as
PPO [26], on the dataset can lead to inaccuracies in value
estimation, resulting in unstable learning, as discussed in Sec.
II-A. We observed that CAtNIPP, which relies on PPO, fails
to train on the dataset, as we will discuss in Sec. IV-C. In or-
der to address this instability, we leverage a key concept from
batch-constrained Q-learning (BCQ) [10], which restricts the
actions selected by the policy during training to a subset of
the given dataset. To achieve this, a model is introduced to
generate actions similar to those in the batch, which are then
used to build a policy with the Q-function. Consequently,
OffRIPP consists of two components: an RL agent and a
behavior policy approximator. To boost sample efficiency,
both modules share the entire neural network-based function
approximators, except for the final layer.
1) Behavior Policy Approximation: We build an approxi-
mation of the behavior policy, ˆπθβ , to ensure that the learning
policy avoids selecting actions that are not supported by the
dataset. Since we only have access to the dataset generated
by the behavior policy, and not the behavior policy itself,
we utilize imitation learning, which minimizes the negative
log-likelihood function. The loss function for the behavior
policy approximator, parameterized by θβ, is written as:
L(θβ) =−E(s,a)∼D

a log ˆπθβ(a|s)

, (3)
where (s,a ) is the state-action pair in the dataset. We pretrain
the behavior policy approximator before policy learning.
2) Policy Learning: We build a policy based on the Q-
function, QθQ(s,a ), and train it using the TD update. Here,
in contrast to Q-learning, which employs a greedy policy,
represented as π(s) = arg maxQ(s,a ), following BCQ, we
use the behavior policy approximator to construct a policy
based on the Q-function as follows:
π(s) = arg max
ˆa∋ˆπβ(ˆa|s)>τ
Qθ(s, ˆa), (4)
whereτ is the threshold that defines how much the learning
policy deviates from the behavior policy. In other words,
we restrict the policy to generate actions that the behavior
policy is likely to generate with a probability above the
threshold τ. Note that τ = 0 corresponds to fully imitating
the behavior policy, while τ = 1 corresponds to following
the greedy policy. The rationale behind this is to avoid using
unseen state-action pairs, which can lead to extrapolation
errors. Based on this policy, we train the Q-function using
TD update and the corresponding loss function is written as
L(θQ) = E(s,a,r,s′)∼D
h
r +γ max
ˆa∋ˆπβ(ˆa|s′)>τ
Q¯θQ(s′, ˆa)
−QθQ(s,a )
2i
, (5)
where ¯θQ represents the parameters of the target Q-function,
which is a delayed update of the Q-function, providing stable
targets to reduce instability during training [27].
3) Network Architecture.: The RL policy and the behavior
policy approximator share the entire network except for
the final layer. The shared network architecture follows the
design of either CAtNIPP [6] or the RL-based IPP [8], and
any existing RL-based IPP architecture can be integrated.
Here, we explain an example based on CAtNIPP. The shared
network takes an augmented graph as input, where each
node contains the position and the mean and variance of
the GP, to generate an effective representation that captures
the relationships between nodes, making the system spatially
aware. This augmented graph is then processed by positional
encoding. Additionally, the planning state, which includes the
remaining budget and executed trajectory, is combined with

=== PDF PAGE 4 ===
Fig. 2: The architecture of OffRIPP: A graph augmented by environment modeling (the output of GP) and the remaining
budget are used as input. The approximated behavior policy and Q-function are used to determine an action.
the augmented graph to form a set of context-aware node
embeddings. These embeddings are passed through an LSTM
block, whose output is then processed by a network that
employs cross-attention between the current node features
and their neighboring node features. This process computes
an enhanced current node representation, making it spatially
aware of the environment and cognizant of the path taken to
reach its current state. On top of this shared network, two
separate networks are used for the approximated behavior
policy and the Q-function. For the behavior policy, a final
attention layer utilizes the neighboring features to extract
the policy, which essentially consists of the attention scores
from this layer. A binary vector mask, M, is applied to
eliminate nodes that violate the budget constraint of reaching
the destination from a particular node, enhancing the training
process. For the Q-function, a simple MLP layer is used.
Finally, the action is obtained based on Eq. 4, which requires
both the approximated behavior policy and the Q-function.
Our architecture is illustrated in Fig. 2.
IV. EXPERIMENTS
In this section, we validate the effectiveness of our
proposed approach, OffRIPP, in two different simulated
environments: a 2D light-intensity IPP task and a 3D fruit
identification task, as well as in a real-world robotic envi-
ronment. Since our work is the first to apply offline RL to
IPP, we generate diverse datasets with varying performance
levels, comprising both optimal and sub-optimal data, using
existing RL-based IPP algorithms and a traditional IPP solver
for evaluation. We believe the generated dataset will also
make a valuable contribution to the research community.
A. Experiment Setup
1) Light-intensity Environment: Adopted from [6], the
goal of this environment is to predict the light-intensity,
which is the interest in the context of IPP, across the 2D
map. The light intensity is constructed using 8 to 12 random
2-dimensional Gaussian distributions within the unit square
[0, 1]2. The light-intensity is illustrated in Fig. 3a. At the start
of each episode, the agent’s initial prediction is initialized
as a uniform distribution. During dataset collection, both the
agent’s start and destination positions are randomly generated
within the same unit square. The environment is discretized
using a PRM with a fixed number of nodes, 400, and the
(a) Light-intensity
Environment
(b) 3D Fruit Identifi-
cation Environment
(c) Real-world Ex-
periment
Fig. 3: Three experiments settings: (a) Heatmap representing
light intensity. (b) Green stars and blue structures represent
the target fruits and tree, respectively. (c) Real-world experi-
ment featuring a robot (dotted circle) with the intensity map
projected onto the arena.
number of neighboring nodes is set to 20. The agent collects
measurements every 0.2 units of distance traveled, and while
the budget is randomized between 6 and 8 during dataset
collection, it is evaluated at fixed budgets of 6, 8, and 10
during testing. The maximum episode length is fixed at 256
time steps.
Dataset: We generate the following datasets using both
CAtNIPP and a non-learning adaptive sampling method, with
each dataset consisting of 18,500 trajectories.
• Expert Dataset : This dataset is collected by deploying
the CAtNIPP greedy variant’s best-performing model, which
has been trained for over 50,000 episodes.
• Medium Dataset: This dataset is collected by deploying
partially trained CAtNIPP greedy variant models, specifically
those chosen between 256 and 512 episodes of training. This
dataset consists of suboptimal trajectories.
• Greedy Planning Dataset: This dataset is collected using
a simple heuristic adaptive sampling approach, where the
agent selects its next node from among its neighbors based
on the highest entropy of the GP. We refer to this method as
greedy planning. Note that this method is not learning-based
and does not require any training.
2) 3D Fruit Identification: We use the 3D fruit identifica-
tion environment introduced in [8]. The goal is to identify the
fruits, illustrated in Fig. 3b. The environment is represented
by a 50× 50× 50 voxel occupancy grid, which is initially
unknown and updated based on sensor observations. Trees
are randomly placed, and fruits are attached to the trees
at random positions. The agent observes part of the field

=== PDF PAGE 5 ===
TABLE I: Performance comparison in terms of the trace of
the covariance matrix in the light-intensity environment. A
lower value indicates reduced uncertainty, indicating better
performance. Note that the behavior policy is not a baseline.
Model Budget 6 Budget 8 Budget 10
Expert Dataset
Behavior Policy
(Dataset) 18.48 ± 7.76 6.96 ± 2.68 3.73 ± 1.57
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -CAtNIPP
(Offline Trained) 137.5 ± 167.2 125.8 ± 203.7 110.3 ± 245.1
BC 30.84 ± 14.02 9.93 ± 5.03 7.02 ± 3.06
OffRIPP 23.28 ± 5.80 7.83 ± 2.87 3.96 ± 1.41
Medium Dataset
Behavior Policy
(Dataset) 32.84 ± 7.98 18.20 ± 5.69 9.78 ± 2.25
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -CAtNIPP
(Offline Trained) 480.8 ± 199.2 557.4 ± 207.5 628.6 ± 182.7
BC 48.08 ± 33.02 23.59 ± 19.07 11.36 ± 9.47
OffRIPP 34.47 ± 27.41 17.91 ± 10.54 8.10 ± 4.42
Greedy Planning Dataset
Behavior Policy
(Dataset) 73.21 ± 99.80 65.00 ± 102.84 60.46 ± 104.41
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -CAtNIPP
(Offline Trained) 433.1 ± 169.1 517.8 ± 195.7 602.9 ± 176.5
BC 42.25 ± 27.91 16.39 ± 10.27 10.04 ± 5.86
OffRIPP 39.16 ± 22.42 16.56 ± 12.82 7.61 ± 5.75
Non-learning-based IPP solvers
Greedy Planning 73.21 ± 99.80 65.00 ± 102.84 60.46 ± 104.41
RAOr 49.47 ± 20.29 19.87 ± 7.71 12.54 ± 5.13
of view, including free space, observed fruits, and trees.
The action space consists of four discretized yaw angles.
The reward function is based on the reduction in utility
uncertainty of the GP and the number of observed targets.
Dataset: We generate the following datasets using an RL-
based IPP solver and a traditional approach, with each dataset
consisting of 18,500 trajectories.
• Expert Dataset: This dataset is collected by deploying a
policy trained for approximately 10,000 interactions with the
environment. The policy achieves the optimal performance.
• Medium Dataset : This dataset is gathered using a
partially trained policy, specifically models trained between
256 and 512 episodes. These policies are suboptimal and
exhibit less efficient decision-making.
• Greedy Planning Dataset: This dataset is collected using
a simple heuristic adaptive sampling approach, similar to the
2D environment. The agent selects its next node to travel
to based on the highest entropy in the GP model, without
requiring any learning or training.
B. Training Details
To train OffRIPP, we use the Adam optimizer [28], a
batch size of 256, and an update frequency of 100 for the
target network. For the threshold τ in Eq. 4 , we perform
hyperparameter tuning in the range (0, 1). OffRIPP trains
for 1 epoch on the dataset, requiring an average of 3 hours
in the light-intensity environment and 18 hours in the 3D
fruit identification environment when using a workstation
TABLE II: Performance comparison in terms of the fruit
detection rate in the 3D fruit identification environment.
A higher value indicates better performance. Note that the
behavior policy is not a baseline.
Model Budget 6 Budget 8 Budget 10
Expert Dataset
Behavior Policy
(Dataset) 46.17 ± 6.94 54.61 ± 6.41 59.12 ± 7.82
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -3D RL-based IPP
(Offline Trained) 26.85 ± 9.86 32.55 ± 10.75 36.53 ± 12.40
BC 45.98 ± 7.86 53.87 ± 7.12 59.69 ± 7.51
OffRIPP 46.60 ± 8.87 55.57 ± 6.34 61.48 ± 6.88
Medium Dataset
Behavior Policy
(Dataset) 27.32 ± 13.31 32.92 ± 15.73 38.55 ± 18.09
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -3D RL-based IPP
(Offline Trained) 24.31 ± 10.96 30.45 ± 8.80 36.21 ± 12.23
BC 16.00 ± 6.41 19.86 ± 6.79 20.31 ± 7.82
OffRIPP 29.27 ± 11.08 32.33 ± 10.20 36.37 ± 11.25
Greedy Planning Dataset
Behavior Policy
(Dataset) 17.29 ± 13.09 17.35 ± 14.10 31.02 ± 13.82
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -3D RL-based IPP
(Offline Trained) 24.40 ± 10.63 29.43 ± 11.02 29.41 ± 10.26
BC 7.64 ± 7.44 11.39 ± 10.48 8.72 ± 8.34
OffRIPP 25.28 ± 11.31 29.71 ± 9.20 36.26 ± 10.82
equipped with an Intel Xeon Gold 5218 CPU and three
NVIDIA RTX 6000 GPUs.
C. Experimental Results
1) Light-intensity Environment: For the evaluation of the
proposed framework, OffRIPP, we consider four baselines:
(i) Greedy Planning , where the agent selects its next node
from its neighbors based on the highest entropy of the
GP; (ii) Randomized Anytime Orienteering (RAOr) [5], a
sampling-based heuristic approach. Note that Greedy Plan-
ning and RAOr do not require training, so we report their
performances regardless of the dataset; (iii) Behavior Cloning
(BC), which imitates the behavioral policy. We use the
CAtNIPP architecture for BC and train it by optimizing the
negative log-likelihood function; and (iv) CAtNIPP [6] is
trained offline, where the CAtNIPP agent is trained using
PPO on the dataset. Besides the baselines, we also report the
performance of the dataset, which reflects the quality of the
data used to train the models, to validate if the trained model
is able to outperform the model that generated the dataset.
Note that the behavior policy is trained online, which makes
comparisons with OffRIPP unfair.
We provide the performance of the algorithms under
three types of datasets, as described in Sec. IV-A, with
three different budgets of 6, 8, and 10. For the evaluation
metric, we use the average trace of the covariance matrix
over 50 different instances of the environment, which is the
optimization objective in RL and is also used as a comparison
metric in [6]. The corresponding results are shown in Table
I. It is observed that OffRIPP consistently produces the
lowest covariance trace values across all budget instances,

=== PDF PAGE 6 ===
Fig. 4: Performance of OffRIPP with respect to various
sizes of the dataset trained on the expert dataset and tested
using a budget of 10 in the light-intensity environment. A
lower value on the Y-axis is better. RAOr does not require a
dataset since it is a non-learning method.
indicating superior performance compared to the baselines.
Upon closer examination, it is noteworthy that CAtNIPP, an
online RL algorithm, performs poorly, demonstrating that
the naive application of RL in an offline training setting
is unstable. However, OffRIPP performs well, even better
than the dataset performance in many cases. In addition,
OffRIPP trained on any dataset outperforms both non-
learning-based algorithms, Greedy Planning and RAOr.
2) 3D Fruit Identification Environment: For evaluation,
we consider two baselines: (i) BC and (ii) the 3D RL-based
IPP solver proposed in [8], as detailed in Sec. II-B. These
models are assessed across three dataset types under budget
constraints of 6, 8, and 10, as outlined in Sec. IV-A.
The evaluation metric used is the average fruit detection
rate across 50 different instances of the environment, follow-
ing the same approach for comparative analysis as employed
in [8]. This metric captures the accuracy and efficiency of the
models in detecting fruits within a limited budget, offering
a reliable means of comparison. As illustrated in Table II,
OffRIPP consistently delivers superior fruit detection rates
across all budget levels, significantly outperforming both
BC and the 3D RL-based IPP solver. The 3D RL-based
IPP solver, though designed for online RL, demonstrates
suboptimal performance when applied in an offline training
setting, highlighting its instability under such conditions.
On the other hand, OffRIPP not only outperforms the
baselines but also exceeds the dataset’s performance in many
cases. Notably, on the Greedy Planning dataset, which is
generated by a non-learning method, we observe a significant
improvement.
D. Analysis
1) Performance with respect to the dataset: The per-
formance of OffRIPP is influenced by both the quality
and quantity of the dataset, as OffRIPP depends on the
given dataset without generating new data based on the
current policy. In Table I and Table II, it is observed that
performance improves as the performance of the behavior
policy improves. We now provide the performance with
respect to the dataset size. Fig. 4 shows the performance of
OffRIPP and RAOr. Performance improves as the number
of training episodes increases, with convergence beginning
around 18k episodes. This suggests that 18k is the minimum
dataset size required for optimal performance. Furthermore,
OffRIPP requires only 500 episodes to outperform RAOr,
a non-learning-based IPP solver.
2) Total Planning time: One of the advantages of
OffRIPP is its fast planning during the execution phase. We
provide the total planning time for executing one trajectory
for OffRIPP, BC, and RAOr evaluated in the light-intensity
environment. OffRIPP requires 0.64 seconds, slightly more
time compared to BC (0.62 seconds) due to the additional
network—estimation of Q-value—however, it is significantly
faster than RAOr (6.11 seconds), the SOTA non-learning-
based IPP solver. Therefore, OffRIPP outperforms the non-
learning method in both performance and planning time.
E. Experimental Validation on Real Robot
We validate OffRIPP on a real-robot system in a light-
intensity environment. Specifically, we project the light-
intensity environment onto a physical 1.5× 1.5 m2 arena, as
shown in Fig. 3c, maintaining consistency in experimental
configuration between simulation and physical deployment.
The Khepera-IV robot, equipped with a Raspberry Pi 3 and a
camera module, is then deployed. In this experiment, we first
train the robot using OffRIPP with the expert dataset, and
then deploy it in the arena. During deployment, the robot
collects real-time images and executes actions from those
observations. This experiment demonstrates the adaptability
of OffRIPP, enabling rapid decision-making and action in
real time. Our results confirm OffRIPP’s suitability for
real-world use, showing it can generalize from simulation
to reality without retraining or extensive modifications. A
video of this experiment is provided 1.
V. CONCLUSION
In this paper, we present an offline RL-based IPP frame-
work that enables training an RL agent to find a path that
maximizes information gain without environment interac-
tions during training. Based on the IPP architecture, which
incorporates a graph, environment modeling using a GP, and
attention mechanisms, we model an approximated behavior
policy that imitates the policy used to generate the dataset,
along with a Q-function. We then build a policy that chooses
an action that maximizes the Q value, using the approximated
behavior policy to select from among the actions likely found
in the dataset. We show that OffRIPP outperforms the
baselines, including the traditional IPP solver, in terms of
both performance and planning time across two different
environments. Additionally, we validate the effectiveness
of OffRIPP in a real-robot system. Future work includes
learning multi-agent IPP policies from a dataset.
1The link for the real-robot experiment - Link.

=== PDF PAGE 7 ===
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work has been supported by NSF and USDA-NIFA
under AI Institute for Resilient Agriculture, Award No. 2021-
67021-35329 and Department of Agriculture Award Number
2023-67021-39073. The authors would like to thank the
RISS program for providing the opportunity to conduct
this research. A special thanks to Mrs. Rachel Burcin, Dr.
John M. Dolan, Ms. Morgan Grimm, and the entire CMU
Robotics Institute community for their support. The authors
also gratefully acknowledge Dr. Simon Stepputtis for his
assistance in conducting real-world experiments.
REFERENCES
[1] G. Hitz, E. Galceran, M.- `E. Garneau, F. Pomerleau, and R. Siegwart,
“Adaptive continuous-space informative path planning for online en-
vironmental monitoring,” Journal of Field Robotics, vol. 34, no. 8, pp.
1427–1449, 2017.
[2] A. A. Meera, M. Popovi ´c, A. Millane, and R. Siegwart, “Obstacle-
aware adaptive informative path planning for uav-based target search,”
in 2019 International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA).
IEEE, 2019, pp. 718–724.
[3] M. Popovi ´c, T. Vidal-Calleja, G. Hitz, J. J. Chung, I. Sa, R. Siegwart,
and J. Nieto, “An informative path planning framework for uav-based
terrain monitoring,” Autonomous Robots, vol. 44, no. 6, pp. 889–911,
2020.
[4] S. Karaman and E. Frazzoli, “Sampling-based algorithms for optimal
motion planning,” The international journal of robotics research ,
vol. 30, no. 7, pp. 846–894, 2011.
[5] S. Arora and S. Scherer, “Randomized algorithm for informative
path planning with budget constraints,” in 2017 IEEE International
Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA) . IEEE, 2017, pp.
4997–5004.
[6] Y . Cao, Y . Wang, A. Vashisth, H. Fan, and G. A. Sartoretti, “Catnipp:
Context-aware attention-based network for informative path planning,”
in Conference on Robot Learning . PMLR, 2023, pp. 1928–1937.
[7] J. R ¨uckin, L. Jin, and M. Popovi´c, “Adaptive informative path planning
using deep reinforcement learning for uav-based active sensing,” in
2022 International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA) .
IEEE, 2022, pp. 4473–4479.
[8] A. Vashisth, J. Ruckin, F. Magistri, C. Stachniss, and M. Popovic,
“Deep reinforcement learning with dynamic graphs for adaptive infor-
mative path planning,” IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters , 2024.
[9] A. Kumar, A. Zhou, G. Tucker, and S. Levine, “Conservative q-
learning for offline reinforcement learning,” Advances in Neural In-
formation Processing Systems , vol. 33, pp. 1179–1191, 2020.
[10] S. Fujimoto, D. Meger, and D. Precup, “Off-policy deep reinforcement
learning without exploration,” in International conference on machine
learning. PMLR, 2019, pp. 2052–2062.
[11] G. Tesauro et al. , “Temporal difference learning and td-gammon,”
Communications of the ACM , vol. 38, no. 3, pp. 58–68, 1995.
[12] J. Kim, S. Lee, W. Kim, and Y . Sung, “Value-aided conditional
supervised learning for offline rl,” arXiv e-prints , pp. arXiv–2402,
2024.
[13] ——, “Decision convformer: Local filtering in metaformer is
sufficient for decision making,” in The Twelfth International
Conference on Learning Representations , 2024. [Online]. Available:
https://openreview.net/forum?id=af2c8EaKl8
[14] I. Kostrikov, A. Nair, and S. Levine, “Offline reinforcement learning
with implicit q-learning,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.06169 , 2021.
[15] S. Fujimoto and S. S. Gu, “A minimalist approach to offline reinforce-
ment learning,” Advances in neural information processing systems ,
vol. 34, pp. 20 132–20 145, 2021.
[16] S. Fujimoto, H. Hoof, and D. Meger, “Addressing function approxi-
mation error in actor-critic methods,” in International conference on
machine learning. PMLR, 2018, pp. 1587–1596.
[17] J. R ¨uckin, F. Magistri, C. Stachniss, and M. Popovi ´c, “An informative
path planning framework for active learning in uav-based semantic
mapping,” IEEE Transactions on Robotics , 2023.
[18] S. Kailas, W. Luo, and K. Sycara, “Multi-robot adaptive sampling
for supervised spatiotemporal forecasting,” in EPIA Conference on
Artificial Intelligence. Springer, 2023, pp. 349–361.
[19] M. Popovi ´c, J. Ott, J. R ¨uckin, and M. J. Kochenderfer, “Learning-
based methods for adaptive informative path planning,” Robotics and
Autonomous Systems, p. 104727, 2024.
[20] A. Jones, M. Schwager, and C. Belta, “A receding horizon algorithm
for informative path planning with temporal logic constraints,” in 2013
IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation . IEEE,
2013, pp. 5019–5024.
[21] S.-H. Yoo, A. Stuntz, Y . Zhang, R. Rothschild, G. A. Hollinger, and
R. N. Smith, “Experimental analysis of receding horizon planning
algorithms for marine monitoring,” in Field and Service Robotics:
Results of the 10th International Conference . Springer, 2016, pp.
31–44.
[22] Y . Wei and R. Zheng, “Informative path planning for mobile sensing
with reinforcement learning,” in IEEE INFOCOM 2020-IEEE Confer-
ence on Computer Communications . IEEE, 2020, pp. 864–873.
[23] R. Geraerts and M. H. Overmars, “A comparative study of proba-
bilistic roadmap planners,” in Algorithmic foundations of robotics V .
Springer, 2004, pp. 43–57.
[24] M. Seeger, “Gaussian processes for machine learning,” International
journal of neural systems , vol. 14, no. 02, pp. 69–106, 2004.
[25] J. Wang, “An intuitive tutorial to gaussian processes regression,”
Computing in Science & Engineering , 2023.
[26] J. Schulman, F. Wolski, P. Dhariwal, A. Radford, and O. Klimov,
“Proximal policy optimization algorithms,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:1707.06347, 2017.
[27] V . Mnih, K. Kavukcuoglu, D. Silver, A. A. Rusu, J. Veness, M. G.
Bellemare, A. Graves, M. Riedmiller, A. K. Fidjeland, G. Ostrovski
et al. , “Human-level control through deep reinforcement learning,”
nature, vol. 518, no. 7540, pp. 529–533, 2015.
[28] D. P. Kingma, “Adam: A method for stochastic optimization,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:1412.6980, 2014.